Title: Control flow and error handling - JavaScript | MDN
Source: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Control_flow_and_error_handling

JavaScript supports a compact set of statements, specifically
control flow statements, that you can use to incorporate a great deal of interactivity
in your application. This chapter provides an overview of these statements.

The JavaScript reference
contains exhaustive details about the statements in this chapter. The semicolon
(;) character is used to separate statements in JavaScript code.

Any JavaScript expression is also a statement.
See Expressions and operators
for complete information about expressions.

The most basic statement is a block statement, which is used to group
statements. The block is delimited by a pair of curly braces:

Block statements are commonly used with control flow statements (if,
for, while).

Here, { x++; } is the block statement.

Note:
var-declared variables are not block-scoped, but are scoped to the containing function or script, and the effects of setting them persist beyond the block itself. For example:

This outputs 2 because the var x statement within the block is in the same scope as the var x statement before the block. (In C or Java, the equivalent code would have output 1.)

This scoping effect can be mitigated by using let or const.

A conditional statement is a set of commands that executes if a specified condition is
true. JavaScript supports two conditional statements: if...else and
switch.

Use the if statement to execute a statement if a logical condition is
true. Use the optional else clause to execute a statement if
the condition is false.

An if statement looks like this:

Here, the condition can be any expression that evaluates to
true or false. (See Boolean
for an explanation of what evaluates to true and false.)

If condition evaluates to true,
statement1 is executed. Otherwise,
statement2 is executed. statement1 and
statement2 can be any statement, including further nested
if statements.

You can also compound the statements using else if to have multiple
conditions tested in sequence, as follows:

In the case of multiple conditions, only the first logical condition which evaluates to
true will be executed. To execute multiple statements, group them within a
block statement ({ /* … */ }).

In general, it's good practice to always use block statements—especially when
nesting if statements:

In general it's good practice to not have an if...else with an assignment like x = y as a condition:

However, in the rare case you find yourself wanting to do something like that, the while documentation has a Using an assignment as a condition section with guidance on a general best-practice syntax you should know about and follow.

The following values evaluate to false (also known as Falsy values):

All other values—including all objects—evaluate to true when passed to a
conditional statement.

Note:
Do not confuse the primitive boolean values
true and false with the true and false values of the
Boolean object!

For example:

In the following example, the function checkData returns true
if the number of characters in a Text object is three. Otherwise, it
displays an alert and returns false.

A switch statement allows a program to evaluate an expression and attempt
to match the expression's value to a case label. If a match is found, the
program executes the associated statement.

A switch statement looks like this:

JavaScript evaluates the above switch statement as follows:

The optional break statement associated with each case clause
ensures that the program breaks out of switch once the matched statement is
executed, and then continues execution at the statement following switch.
If break is omitted, the program continues execution inside the
switch statement (and will execute statements under the next case, and so on).

In the following example, if fruitType evaluates to
"Bananas", the program matches the value with case "Bananas"
and executes the associated statement. When break is encountered, the
program exits the switch and continues execution from the statement
following switch. If break were omitted, the statement for
case "Cherries" would also be executed.

You can throw exceptions using the throw statement and handle them using
the try...catch statements.

Just about any object can be thrown in JavaScript. Nevertheless, not all thrown objects
are created equal. While it is common to throw numbers or strings as errors, it is
frequently more effective to use one of the exception types specifically created for
this purpose:

Use the throw statement to throw an exception. A throw
statement specifies the value to be thrown:

You may throw any expression, not just expressions of a specific type. The following
code throws several exceptions of varying types:

The try...catch statement marks a block of statements to try, and
specifies one or more responses should an exception be thrown. If an exception is
thrown, the try...catch statement catches it.

The try...catch statement consists of a try block, which
contains one or more statements, and a catch block, containing statements
that specify what to do if an exception is thrown in the try block.

In other words, you want the try block to succeed—but if it does not, you
want control to pass to the catch block. If any statement within the
try block (or in a function called from within the try block)
throws an exception, control immediately shifts to the catch
block. If no exception is thrown in the try block, the catch
block is skipped. The finally block executes after the try and
catch blocks execute but before the statements following the
try...catch statement.

The following example uses a try...catch statement. The example calls a
function that retrieves a month name from an array based on the value passed to the
function. If the value does not correspond to a month number
(1 – 12), an exception is thrown with the value
'Invalid month code' and the statements in the catch block set the
monthName variable to 'unknown'.

You can use a catch block to handle all exceptions that may be generated
in the try block.

The catch block specifies an identifier (exception
in the preceding syntax) that holds the value specified by the throw
statement. You can use this identifier to get information about the exception that was
thrown.

JavaScript creates this identifier when the catch block is entered. The
identifier lasts only for the duration of the catch block. Once the
catch block finishes executing, the identifier no longer exists.

For example, the following code throws an exception. When the exception occurs, control
transfers to the catch block.

Note:
When logging errors to the console inside
a catch block, using console.error() rather than
console.log() is advised for debugging. It formats the message as an
error, and adds it to the list of error messages generated by the page.

The finally block contains statements to be executed after the
try and catch blocks execute. Additionally, the
finally block executes before the code that follows the
try...catch...finally statement.

It is also important to note that the finally block will execute
whether or not an exception is thrown. If an exception is thrown, however, the
statements in the finally block execute even if no catch block
handles the exception that was thrown.

You can use the finally block to make your script fail gracefully when an
exception occurs. For example, you may need to release a resource that your script has
tied up.

The following example opens a file and then executes statements that use the file.
(Server-side JavaScript allows you to access files.) If an exception is thrown while the
file is open, the finally block closes the file before the script fails.
Using finally here ensures that the file is never left open, even
if an error occurs.

If the finally block returns a value, this value becomes the return value
of the entire try...catch...finally production, regardless of any
return statements in the try and catch blocks:

Overwriting of return values by the finally block also applies to
exceptions thrown or re-thrown inside of the catch block:

You can nest one or more try...catch statements.

If an inner try block does not have a corresponding
catch block:

For more information, see nested try-blocks
on the try...catch
reference page.

Depending on the type of error, you may be able to use the name and
message properties to get a more refined message.

The name property provides the general class of Error (such
as DOMException or Error), while message
generally provides a more succinct message than one would get by converting the error
object to a string.

If you are throwing your own exceptions, in order to take advantage of these properties
(such as if your catch block doesn't discriminate between your own
exceptions and system ones), you can use the Error constructor.

For example:

This page was last modified on Sep 19, 2025 by MDN contributors.