Title: Functions - JavaScript | MDN
Source: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Functions

Functions are one of the fundamental building blocks in JavaScript. A function in JavaScript is similar to a procedure—a set of statements that performs a task or calculates a value, but for a procedure to qualify as a function, it should take some input and return an output where there is some obvious relationship between the input and the output. To use a function, you must define it somewhere in the scope from which you wish to call it.

See also the exhaustive reference chapter about JavaScript functions to get to know the details.

A function definition (also called a function declaration, or function statement) consists of the function keyword, followed by:

For example, the following code defines a function named square:

The function square takes one parameter, called number. The function consists of one statement that says to return the parameter of the function (that is, number) multiplied by itself. The return statement specifies the value returned by the function, which is number * number.

Parameters are essentially passed to functions by value — so if the code within the body of a function assigns a completely new value to a parameter that was passed to the function, the change is not reflected globally or in the code which called that function.

When you pass an object as a parameter, if the function changes the object's properties, that change is visible outside the function, as shown in the following example:

When you pass an array as a parameter, if the function changes any of the array's values, that change is visible outside the function, as shown in the following example:

Function declarations and expressions can be nested, which forms a scope chain. For example:

See function scopes and closures for more information.

While the function declaration above is syntactically a statement, functions can also be created by a function expression.

Such a function can be anonymous; it does not have to have a name. For example, the function square could have been defined as:

However, a name can be provided with a function expression. Providing a name allows the function to refer to itself, and also makes it easier to identify the function in a debugger's stack traces:

Function expressions are convenient when passing a function as an argument to another function. The following example defines a map function that should receive a function as first argument and an array as second argument. Then, it is called with a function defined by a function expression:

In JavaScript, a function can be defined based on a condition. For example, the following function definition defines myFunc only if num equals 0:

In addition to defining functions as described here, you can also use the Function constructor to create functions from a string at runtime, much like eval().

A method is a function that is a property of an object. Read more about objects and methods in Working with objects.

Defining a function does not execute it. Defining it names the function and specifies what to do when the function is called.

Calling the function actually performs the specified actions with the indicated parameters. For example, if you define the function square, you could call it as follows:

The preceding statement calls the function with an argument of 5. The function executes its statements and returns the value 25.

Functions must be in scope when they are called, but the function declaration can be hoisted (appear below the call in the code). The scope of a function declaration is the function in which it is declared (or the entire program, if it is declared at the top level).

The arguments of a function are not limited to strings and numbers. You can pass whole objects to a function. The showProps() function (defined in Working with objects) is an example of a function that takes an object as an argument.

A function can call itself. For example, here is a function that computes factorials recursively:

You could then compute the factorials of 1 through 5 as follows:

There are other ways to call functions. There are often cases where a function needs to be called dynamically, or the number of arguments to a function vary, or in which the context of the function call needs to be set to a specific object determined at runtime.

It turns out that functions are themselves objects — and in turn, these objects have methods. (See the Function object.) The call() and apply() methods can be used to achieve this goal.

Consider the example below:

This code runs without any error, despite the square() function being called before it's declared. This is because the JavaScript interpreter hoists the entire function declaration to the top of the current scope, so the code above is equivalent to:

Function hoisting only works with function declarations — not with function expressions. The following code will not work:

A function can refer to and call itself. It can be referred to either by the function expression or declaration's name, or via any in-scope variable that refers to the function object. For example, consider the following function definition:

Within the function body, you can refer to the function itself either as bar or foo, and call itself using bar() or foo().

A function that calls itself is called a recursive function. In some ways, recursion is analogous to a loop. Both execute the same code multiple times, and both require a condition (to avoid an infinite loop, or rather, infinite recursion in this case).

For example, consider the following loop:

It can be converted into a recursive function declaration, followed by a call to that function:

However, some algorithms cannot be simple iterative loops. For example, getting all the nodes of a tree structure (such as the DOM) is easier via recursion:

Compared to the function loop, each recursive call itself makes many recursive calls here.

It is possible to convert any recursive algorithm to a non-recursive one, but the logic is often much more complex, and doing so requires the use of a stack.

In fact, recursion itself uses a stack: the function stack. The stack-like behavior can be seen in the following example:

An Immediately Invoked Function Expression (IIFE) is a code pattern that directly calls a function defined as an expression. It looks like this:

Instead of saving the function in a variable, the function is immediately invoked. This is almost equivalent to just writing the function body, but there are a few unique benefits:

For more information, see the IIFE glossary entry.

Functions form a scope for variables—this means variables defined inside a function cannot be accessed from anywhere outside the function. The function scope inherits from all the upper scopes. For example, a function defined in the global scope can access all variables defined in the global scope. A function defined inside another function can also access all variables defined in its parent function, and any other variables to which the parent function has access. On the other hand, the parent function (and any other parent scope) does not have access to the variables and functions defined inside the inner function. This provides a sort of encapsulation for the variables in the inner function.

We also refer to the function body as a closure. A closure is any piece of source code (most commonly, a function) that refers to some variables, and the closure "remembers" these variables even when the scope in which these variables were declared has exited.

Closures are usually illustrated with nested functions to show that they remember variables beyond the lifetime of its parent scope; but in fact, nested functions are unnecessary. Technically speaking, all functions in JavaScript form closures—some just don't capture anything, and closures don't even have to be functions. The key ingredients for a useful closure are the following:

The following is a typical example of a closure:

It can be much more complex than the code above. An object containing methods for manipulating the inner variables of the outer function can be returned.

In the code above, the name variable of the outer function is accessible to the inner functions, and there is no other way to access the inner variables except through the inner functions. The inner variables of the inner functions act as safe stores for the outer arguments and variables. They hold "persistent" and "encapsulated" data for the inner functions to work with. The functions do not even have to be assigned to a variable, or have a name.

In the code above, we use the IIFE pattern. Within this IIFE scope, two values exist: a variable apiCode and an unnamed function that gets returned and gets assigned to the variable getCode. apiCode is in the scope of the returned unnamed function but not in the scope of any other part of the program, so there is no way for reading the value of apiCode apart from via the getCode function.

Functions can be multiply-nested. For example:

Thus, the closures can contain multiple scopes; they recursively contain the scope of the functions containing it. This is called scope chaining. Consider the following example:

In this example, C accesses B's y and A's x. This can be done because:

The reverse, however, is not true. A cannot access C, because A cannot access any argument or variable of B, which C is a variable of. Thus, C remains private to only B.

When two arguments or variables in the scopes of a closure have the same name, there is a name conflict. More nested scopes take precedence. So, the innermost scope takes the highest precedence, while the outermost scope takes the lowest. This is the scope chain. The first on the chain is the innermost scope, and the last is the outermost scope. Consider the following:

The name conflict happens at the statement return x * 2 and is between inside's parameter x and outside's variable x. The scope chain here is inside => outside => global object. Therefore, inside's x takes precedences over outside's x, and 20 (inside's x) is returned instead of 10 (outside's x).

The arguments of a function are maintained in an array-like object. Within a function, you can address the arguments passed to it as follows:

where i is the ordinal number of the argument, starting at 0. So, the first argument passed to a function would be arguments[0]. The total number of arguments is indicated by arguments.length.

Using the arguments object, you can call a function with more arguments than it is formally declared to accept. This is often useful if you don't know in advance how many arguments will be passed to the function. You can use arguments.length to determine the number of arguments actually passed to the function, and then access each argument using the arguments object.

For example, consider a function that concatenates several strings. The only formal argument for the function is a string that specifies the characters that separate the items to concatenate. The function is defined as follows:

You can pass any number of arguments to this function, and it concatenates each argument into a string "list":

Note:
The arguments variable is "array-like", but not an array. It is array-like in that it has a numbered index and a length property. However, it does not possess all of the array-manipulation methods.

See the Function object in the JavaScript reference for more information.

There are two special kinds of parameter syntax: default parameters and rest parameters.

In JavaScript, parameters of functions default to undefined. However, in some situations it might be useful to set a different default value. This is exactly what default parameters do.

In the past, the general strategy for setting defaults was to test parameter values in the body of the function and assign a value if they are undefined.

In the following example, if no value is provided for b, its value would be undefined when evaluating a*b, and a call to multiply would normally have returned NaN. However, this is prevented by the second line in this example:

With default parameters, a manual check in the function body is no longer necessary. You can put 1 as the default value for b in the function head:

For more details, see default parameters in the reference.

The rest parameter syntax allows us to represent an indefinite number of arguments as an array.

In the following example, the function multiply uses rest parameters to collect arguments from the second one to the end. The function then multiplies these by the first argument.

An arrow function expression (also called a fat arrow to distinguish from a hypothetical -> syntax in future JavaScript) has a shorter syntax compared to function expressions and does not have its own this, arguments, super, or new.target. Arrow functions are always anonymous.

Two factors influenced the introduction of arrow functions: shorter functions and non-binding of this.

In some functional patterns, shorter functions are welcome. Compare:

Until arrow functions, every new function defined its own this value (a new object in the case of a constructor, undefined in strict mode function calls, the base object if the function is called as an "object method", etc.). This proved to be less than ideal with an object-oriented style of programming.

In ECMAScript 3/5, this issue was fixed by assigning the value in this to a variable that could be closed over.

Alternatively, a bound function could be created so that the proper this value would be passed to the growUp() function.

An arrow function does not have its own this; the this value of the enclosing execution context is used. Thus, in the following code, the this within the function that is passed to setInterval has the same value as this in the enclosing function:

This page was last modified on Jul 8, 2025 by MDN contributors.