Title: Loops and iteration - JavaScript | MDN
Source: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Loops_and_iteration

Loops offer a quick and easy way to do something repeatedly. This
chapter of the JavaScript Guide
introduces the different iteration statements available to JavaScript.

You can think of a loop as a computerized version of the game where you tell someone to
take X steps in one direction, then Y steps in another. For example,
the idea "Go five steps to the east" could be expressed this way as a loop:

There are many different kinds of loops, but they all essentially do the same thing:
they repeat an action some number of times. (Note that it's possible that number could
be zero!)

The various loop mechanisms offer different ways to determine the start and end points
of the loop. There are various situations that are more easily served by one type of
loop over the others.

The statements for loops provided in JavaScript are:

A for loop repeats until a specified condition evaluates to false. The JavaScript for loop is similar to the Java and C for loop.

A for statement looks as follows:

When a for loop executes, the following occurs:

In the example below, the function contains a for statement that counts
the number of selected options in a scrolling list (a <select>
element that allows multiple selections).

Here, the for statement declares the variable i and initializes it to 0. It checks that i is less than the number of options in the <select> element, performs the succeeding if statement, and increments i by 1 after each pass through the loop.

The do...while statement repeats until a
specified condition evaluates to false.

A do...while statement looks as follows:

statement is always executed once before the condition is
checked. (To execute multiple statements, use a block statement ({ })
to group those statements.)

If condition is true, the statement executes again. At the
end of every execution, the condition is checked. When the condition is
false, execution stops, and control passes to the statement following
do...while.

In the following example, the do loop iterates at least once and
reiterates until i is no longer less than 5.

A while statement executes its statements as long as a
specified condition evaluates to true. A while statement looks
as follows:

If the condition becomes false,
statement within the loop stops executing and control passes to the
statement following the loop.

The condition test occurs before statement in the loop is
executed. If the condition returns true, statement is executed
and the condition is tested again. If the condition returns
false, execution stops, and control is passed to the statement following
while.

To execute multiple statements, use a block statement ({ }) to group
those statements.

The following while loop iterates as long as n is
less than 3:

With each iteration, the loop increments n and adds that value to
x. Therefore, x and n take on the following
values:

After completing the third pass, the condition n < 3 is no longer
true, so the loop terminates.

Avoid infinite loops. Make sure the condition in a loop eventually becomes
false—otherwise, the loop will never terminate! The statements in the
following while loop execute forever because the condition never becomes
false:

A label provides a statement with an identifier that
lets you refer to it elsewhere in your program. For example, you can use a label to
identify a loop, and then use the break or continue statements
to indicate whether a program should interrupt the loop or continue its execution.

The syntax of the labeled statement looks like the following:

The value of label may be any JavaScript identifier that is not a
reserved word. The statement that you identify with a label may be
any statement. For examples of using labeled statements, see the examples of break and continue below.

Use the break statement to terminate a loop,
switch, or in conjunction with a labeled statement.

The syntax of the break statement looks like this:

The following example iterates through the elements in an array until it finds the
index of an element whose value is theValue:

The continue statement can be used to restart a
while, do-while, for, or label
statement.

The syntax of the continue statement looks like the following:

The following example shows a while loop with a continue
statement that executes when the value of i is 3. Thus,
n takes on the values 1, 3, 7, and
12.

If you comment out the continue;, the loop would run till the end and you would see 1,3,6,10,15.

A statement labeled checkIandJ contains a statement labeled
checkJ. If continue is encountered, the program
terminates the current iteration of checkJ and begins the next
iteration. Each time continue is encountered, checkJ
reiterates until its condition returns false. When false is
returned, the remainder of the checkIandJ statement is completed,
and checkIandJ reiterates until its condition returns
false. When false is returned, the program continues at the
statement following checkIandJ.

If continue had a label of checkIandJ, the program
would continue at the top of the checkIandJ statement.

The for...in statement iterates a specified
variable over all the enumerable properties of an object. For each distinct property,
JavaScript executes the specified statements. A for...in statement looks as
follows:

The following function takes as its argument an object and the object's name. It then
iterates over all the object's properties and returns a string that lists the property
names and their values.

For an object car with properties make and model, result would be:

Although it may be tempting to use this as a way to iterate over Array
elements, the for...in statement will return the name of your user-defined
properties in addition to the numeric indexes.

Therefore, it is better to use a traditional for loop
with a numeric index when iterating over arrays, because the for...in
statement iterates over user-defined properties in addition to the array elements, if
you modify the Array object (such as adding custom properties or methods).

The for...of statement creates a loop Iterating
over iterable objects (including
Array, Map, Set,
arguments object and so on), invoking a custom
iteration hook with statements to be executed for the value of each distinct property.

The following example shows the difference between a for...of loop and a
for...in loop. While for...in iterates
over property names, for...of iterates over property values:

The for...of and for...in statements can also be used with destructuring. For example, you can simultaneously loop over the keys and values of an object using Object.entries().

This page was last modified on Nov 3, 2025 by MDN contributors.