Title: Networking | Docker Docs
Source: https://docs.docker.com/network/

Container networking refers to the ability for containers to connect to and
communicate with each other, and with non-Docker network services.

Containers have networking enabled by default, and they can make outgoing
connections. A container has no information about what kind of network it's
attached to, or whether its network peers are also Docker containers. A
container only sees a network interface with an IP address, a gateway, a
routing table, DNS services, and other networking details.

This page describes networking from the point of view of the container,
and the concepts around container networking.

When Docker Engine on Linux starts for the first time, it has a single
built-in network called the "default bridge" network. When you run a
container without the --network option, it is connected to the default
bridge.

Containers attached to the default bridge have access to network services
outside the Docker host. They use "masquerading" which means, if the
Docker host has Internet access, no additional configuration is needed
for the container to have Internet access.

For example, to run a container on the default bridge network, and have
it ping an Internet host:

With the default configuration, containers attached to the default
bridge network have unrestricted network access to each other using
container IP addresses. They cannot refer to each other by name.

It can be useful to separate groups of containers that should have full
access to each other, but restricted access to containers in other groups.

You can create custom, user-defined networks, and connect groups of containers
to the same network. Once connected to a user-defined network, containers
can communicate with each other using container IP addresses or container names.

The following example creates a network using the bridge network driver and
runs a container in that network:

Docker Engine has a number of network drivers, as well as the default "bridge".
On Linux, the following built-in network drivers are available:

More information can be found in the network driver specific pages, including
their configuration options and details about their functionality.

Native Windows containers have a different set of drivers, see
Windows container network drivers.

Connecting a container to a network can be compared to connecting an Ethernet
cable to a physical host. Just as a host can be connected to multiple Ethernet
networks, a container can be connected to multiple Docker networks.

For example, a frontend container may be connected to a bridge network
with external access, and a
--internal network
to communicate with containers running backend services that do not need
external network access.

A container may also be connected to different types of network. For example,
an ipvlan network to provide internet access, and a bridge network for
access to local services.

Containers can also share networking stacks, see Container networks.

When sending packets, if the destination is an address in a directly connected
network, packets are sent to that network. Otherwise, packets are sent to
a default gateway for routing to their destination. In the example above,
the ipvlan network's gateway must be the default gateway.

The default gateway is selected by Docker, and may change whenever a
container's network connections change.
To make Docker choose a specific default gateway when creating the container
or connecting a new network, set a gateway priority. See option gw-priority
for the
docker run and
docker network connect commands.

The default gw-priority is 0 and the gateway in the network with the
highest priority is the default gateway. So, when a network should always
be the default gateway, it is enough to set its gw-priority to 1.

When you create or run a container using docker create or docker run, all
ports of containers on bridge networks are accessible from the Docker host and
other containers connected to the same network. Ports are not accessible from
outside the host or, with the default configuration, from containers in other
networks.

Use the --publish or -p flag to make a port available outside the host,
and to containers in other bridge networks.

For more information about port mapping, including how to disable it and use
direct routing to containers, see
port publishing.

When creating a network, IPv4 address allocation is enabled by default, it
can be disabled using --ipv4=false. IPv6 address allocation can be enabled
using --ipv6.

By default, the container gets an IP address for every Docker network it attaches to.
A container receives an IP address out of the IP subnet of the network.
The Docker daemon performs dynamic subnetting and IP address allocation for containers.
Each network also has a default subnet mask and gateway.

You can connect a running container to multiple networks,
either by passing the --network flag multiple times when creating the container,
or using the docker network connect command for already running containers.
In both cases, you can use the --ip or --ip6 flags to specify the container's IP address on that particular network.

In the same way, a container's hostname defaults to be the container's ID in Docker.
You can override the hostname using --hostname.
When connecting to an existing network using docker network connect,
you can use the --alias flag to specify an additional network alias for the container on that network.

Docker networks can use either explicitly configured subnets or automatically allocated ones from default pools.

You can specify exact subnets when creating a network:

When no --subnet option is provided, Docker automatically selects a subnet from predefined "default address pools".
These pools can be configured in /etc/docker/daemon.json. Docker's built-in default is equivalent to:

When an IPv6 subnet is required and there are no IPv6 addresses in default-address-pools, Docker allocates
subnets from a Unique Local Address (ULA) prefix. To use specific IPv6 subnets instead, add them to your
default-address-pools. See Dynamic IPv6 subnet allocation
for more information.

Docker attempts to avoid address prefixes already in use on the host. However, you may need to customize
default-address-pools to prevent routing conflicts in some network environments.

The default pools use large subnets, which limits the number of networks you can create. You can divide base
subnets into smaller pools to support more networks.

For example, this configuration allows Docker to create 256 networks from 172.17.0.0/16.
Docker will allocate subnets 172.17.0.0/24, 172.17.1.0/24, and so on, up to 172.17.255.0/24:

You can also request a subnet with a specific prefix length from the default pools by using unspecified
addresses in the --subnet option:

Support for unspecified addresses in --subnet was introduced in Docker 29.0.0.
If Docker is downgraded to an older version, networks created in this way will become unusable.
They can be removed and re-created, or will function again if the daemon is restored to 29.0.0 or later.

Containers use the same DNS servers as the host by default, but you can
override this with --dns.

By default, containers inherit the DNS settings as defined in the
/etc/resolv.conf configuration file.
Containers that attach to the default bridge network receive a copy of this file.
Containers that attach to a
custom network
use Docker's embedded DNS server.
The embedded DNS server forwards external DNS lookups to the DNS servers configured on the host.

You can configure DNS resolution on a per-container basis, using flags for the
docker run or docker create command used to start the container.
The following table describes the available docker run flags related to DNS
configuration.

Your container will have lines in /etc/hosts which define the hostname of the
container itself, as well as localhost and a few other common things. Custom
hosts, defined in /etc/hosts on the host machine, aren't inherited by
containers. To pass additional hosts into a container, refer to
add entries to
container hosts file in the
docker run reference documentation.

In addition to user-defined networks, you can attach a container to another
container's networking stack directly, using the --network container:<name|id> flag format.

The following flags aren't supported for containers using the container:
networking mode:

The following example runs a Redis container, with Redis binding to
127.0.0.1, then running the redis-cli command and connecting to the Redis
server over 127.0.0.1.