Title: Express routing
Source: https://expressjs.com/en/guide/routing.html

Routing refers to how an application’s endpoints (URIs) respond to client requests.
For an introduction to routing, see Basic routing.

You define routing using methods of the Express app object that correspond to HTTP methods;
for example, app.get() to handle GET requests and app.post to handle POST requests. For a full list,
see app.METHOD. You can also use app.all() to handle all HTTP methods and app.use() to
specify middleware as the callback function (See Using middleware for details).

These routing methods specify a callback function (sometimes called “handler functions”) called when the application receives a request to the specified route (endpoint) and HTTP method. In other words, the application “listens” for requests that match the specified route(s) and method(s), and when it detects a match, it calls the specified callback function.

In fact, the routing methods can have more than one callback function as arguments.
With multiple callback functions, it is important to provide next as an argument to the callback function and then call next() within the body of the function to hand off control
to the next callback.

The following code is an example of a very basic route.

A route method is derived from one of the HTTP methods, and is attached to an instance of the express class.

The following code is an example of routes that are defined for the GET and the POST methods to the root of the app.

Express supports methods that correspond to all HTTP request methods: get, post, and so on.
For a full list, see app.METHOD.

There is a special routing method, app.all(), used to load middleware functions at a path for all HTTP request methods. For example, the following handler is executed for requests to the route "/secret" whether using GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, or any other HTTP request method supported in the http module.

Route paths, in combination with a request method, define the endpoints at which requests can be made. Route paths can be strings, string patterns, or regular expressions.

Caution

In express 5, the characters ?, +, *, [], and () are handled differently than in version 4, please review the migration guide for more information.

Caution

In express 4, regular expression characters such as $ need to be escaped with a \.

Note

Express uses path-to-regexp for matching the route paths; see the path-to-regexp documentation for all the possibilities in defining route paths. Express Playground Router is a handy tool for testing basic Express routes, although it does not support pattern matching.

Warning

Query strings are not part of the route path.

This route path will match requests to the root route, /.

This route path will match requests to /about.

This route path will match requests to /random.text.

Caution

The string patterns in Express 5 no longer work. Please refer to the migration guide for more information.

This route path will match acd and abcd.

This route path will match abcd, abbcd, abbbcd, and so on.

This route path will match abcd, abxcd, abRANDOMcd, ab123cd, and so on.

This route path will match /abe and /abcde.

This route path will match anything with an “a” in it.

This route path will match butterfly and dragonfly, but not butterflyman, dragonflyman, and so on.

Route parameters are named URL segments that are used to capture the values specified at their position in the URL. The captured values are populated in the req.params object, with the name of the route parameter specified in the path as their respective keys.

To define routes with route parameters, simply specify the route parameters in the path of the route as shown below.

The name of route parameters must be made up of “word characters” ([A-Za-z0-9_]).

Since the hyphen (-) and the dot (.) are interpreted literally, they can be used along with route parameters for useful purposes.

Caution

In express 5, Regexp characters are not supported in route paths, for more information please refer to the migration guide.

To have more control over the exact string that can be matched by a route parameter, you can append a regular expression in parentheses (()):

Warning

Because the regular expression is usually part of a literal string, be sure to escape any \ characters with an additional backslash, for example \\d+.

Warning

In Express 4.x, the * character in regular expressions is not interpreted in the usual way. As a workaround, use {0,} instead of *. This will likely be fixed in Express 5.

You can provide multiple callback functions that behave like middleware to handle a request. The only exception is that these callbacks might invoke next('route') to bypass the remaining route callbacks. You can use this mechanism to impose pre-conditions on a route, then pass control to subsequent routes if there’s no reason to proceed with the current route.

In this example:

Route handlers can be in the form of a function, an array of functions, or combinations of both, as shown in the following examples.

A single callback function can handle a route. For example:

More than one callback function can handle a route (make sure you specify the next object). For example:

An array of callback functions can handle a route. For example:

A combination of independent functions and arrays of functions can handle a route. For example:

The methods on the response object (res) in the following table can send a response to the client, and terminate the request-response cycle. If none of these methods are called from a route handler, the client request will be left hanging.

You can create chainable route handlers for a route path by using app.route().
Because the path is specified at a single location, creating modular routes is helpful, as is reducing redundancy and typos. For more information about routes, see: Router() documentation.

Here is an example of chained route handlers that are defined by using app.route().

Use the express.Router class to create modular, mountable route handlers. A Router instance is a complete middleware and routing system; for this reason, it is often referred to as a “mini-app”.

The following example creates a router as a module, loads a middleware function in it, defines some routes, and mounts the router module on a path in the main app.

Create a router file named birds.js in the app directory, with the following content:

Then, load the router module in the app:

The app will now be able to handle requests to /birds and /birds/about, as well as call the timeLog middleware function that is specific to the route.

But if the parent route /birds has path parameters, it will not be accessible by default from the sub-routes. To make it accessible, you will need to pass the mergeParams option to the Router constructor reference.