Title: Git - git-merge Documentation
Source: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-merge

Check your version of git by running

git-merge - Join two or more development histories together

Incorporates changes from the named commits (since the time their
histories diverged from the current branch) into the current
branch.  This command is used by git pull to incorporate changes
from another repository and can be used by hand to merge changes
from one branch into another.

Assume the following history exists and the current branch is
master:

Then git merge topic will replay the changes made on the
topic branch since it diverged from master (i.e., E) until
its current commit (C) on top of master, and record the result
in a new commit along with the names of the two parent commits and
a log message from the user describing the changes. Before the operation,
ORIG_HEAD is set to the tip of the current branch (G).

A merge stops if there’s a conflict that cannot be resolved
automatically or if --no-commit was provided when initiating the
merge. At that point you can run git merge --abort or git merge
--continue.

git merge --abort will abort the merge process and try to reconstruct
the pre-merge state. However, if there were uncommitted changes when the
merge started (and especially if those changes were further modified
after the merge was started), git merge --abort will in some cases be
unable to reconstruct the original (pre-merge) changes. Therefore:

Perform the merge and commit the result. This option can
be used to override --no-commit.

With --no-commit perform the merge and stop just before creating
a merge commit, to give the user a chance to inspect and further
tweak the merge result before committing.

Note that fast-forward updates do not create a merge commit and
therefore there is no way to stop those merges with --no-commit.
Thus, if you want to ensure your branch is not changed or updated
by the merge command, use --no-ff with --no-commit.

Invoke an editor before committing successful mechanical merge to
	further edit the auto-generated merge message, so that the user
	can explain and justify the merge. The --no-edit option can be
	used to accept the auto-generated message (this is generally
	discouraged).
The --edit (or -e) option is still useful if you are
giving a draft message with the -m option from the command line
and want to edit it in the editor.

Older scripts may depend on the historical behaviour of not allowing the
user to edit the merge log message. They will see an editor opened when
they run git merge. To make it easier to adjust such scripts to the
updated behaviour, the environment variable GIT_MERGE_AUTOEDIT can be
set to no at the beginning of them.

This option determines how the merge message will be cleaned up before
committing. See git-commit[1] for more details. In addition, if
the <mode> is given a value of scissors, scissors will be appended
to MERGE_MSG before being passed on to the commit machinery in the
case of a merge conflict.

Specifies how a merge is handled when the merged-in history is
already a descendant of the current history.  --ff is the
default unless merging an annotated (and possibly signed) tag
that is not stored in its natural place in the refs/tags/
hierarchy, in which case --no-ff is assumed.

With --ff, when possible resolve the merge as a fast-forward (only
update the branch pointer to match the merged branch; do not create a
merge commit).  When not possible (when the merged-in history is not a
descendant of the current history), create a merge commit.

With --no-ff, create a merge commit in all cases, even when the merge
could instead be resolved as a fast-forward.

With --ff-only, resolve the merge as a fast-forward when possible.
When not possible, refuse to merge and exit with a non-zero status.

GPG-sign the resulting merge commit. The <key-id> argument is
optional and defaults to the committer identity; if specified,
it must be stuck to the option without a space. --no-gpg-sign
is useful to countermand both commit.gpgSign configuration variable,
and earlier --gpg-sign.

In addition to branch names, populate the log message with
one-line descriptions from at most <n> actual commits that are being
merged. See also git-fmt-merge-msg[1].

With --no-log do not list one-line descriptions from the
actual commits being merged.

Add a Signed-off-by trailer by the committer at the end of the commit
log message.  The meaning of a signoff depends on the project
to which you’re committing.  For example, it may certify that
the committer has the rights to submit the work under the
project’s license or agrees to some contributor representation,
such as a Developer Certificate of Origin.
(See https://developercertificate.org for the one used by the
Linux kernel and Git projects.)  Consult the documentation or
leadership of the project to which you’re contributing to
understand how the signoffs are used in that project.

The --no-signoff option can be used to countermand an earlier --signoff
option on the command line.

Git does not (and will not) have a configuration variable to enable
the --signoff command line option by default; see the
commit.signoff entry in gitfaq[7] for more details.

Show a diffstat at the end of the merge. The diffstat is also
controlled by the configuration option merge.stat.

With -n or --no-stat do not show a diffstat at the end of the
merge.

Show a compact-summary at the end of the merge.

Produce the working tree and index state as if a real merge
happened (except for the merge information), but do not actually
make a commit, move the HEAD, or record $GIT_DIR/MERGE_HEAD
(to cause the next git commit command to create a merge
commit).  This allows you to create a single commit on top of
the current branch whose effect is the same as merging another
branch (or more in case of an octopus).

With --no-squash perform the merge and commit the result. This
option can be used to override --squash.

With --squash, --commit is not allowed, and will fail.

By default, the pre-merge and commit-msg hooks are run.
When --no-verify is given, these are bypassed.
See also githooks[5].

Use the given merge strategy; can be supplied more than
once to specify them in the order they should be tried.
If there is no -s option, a built-in list of strategies
is used instead (ort when merging a single head,
octopus otherwise).

Pass merge strategy specific option through to the merge
strategy.

Verify that the tip commit of the side branch being merged is
signed with a valid key, i.e. a key that has a valid uid: in the
default trust model, this means the signing key has been signed by
a trusted key.  If the tip commit of the side branch is not signed
with a valid key, the merge is aborted.

Synonyms to --stat and --no-stat; these are deprecated and will be
removed in the future.

Operate quietly. Implies --no-progress.

Be verbose.

Turn progress on/off explicitly. If neither is specified,
progress is shown if standard error is connected to a terminal.
Note that not all merge strategies may support progress
reporting.

Automatically create a temporary stash entry before the operation
begins, record it in the ref MERGE_AUTOSTASH
and apply it after the operation ends.  This means
that you can run the operation on a dirty worktree.  However, use
with care: the final stash application after a successful
merge might result in non-trivial conflicts.

By default, git merge command refuses to merge histories
that do not share a common ancestor.  This option can be
used to override this safety when merging histories of two
projects that started their lives independently. As that is
a very rare occasion, no configuration variable to enable
this by default exists or will be added.

Set the commit message to be used for the merge commit (in
case one is created).

If --log is specified, a shortlog of the commits being merged
will be appended to the specified message.

The git fmt-merge-msg command can be
used to give a good default for automated git merge
invocations. The automated message can include the branch description.

Prepare the default merge message as if merging to the branch
<branch>, instead of the name of the real branch to which
the merge is made.

Read the commit message to be used for the merge commit (in
case one is created).

If --log is specified, a shortlog of the commits being merged
will be appended to the specified message.

After the rerere mechanism reuses a recorded resolution on
the current conflict to update the files in the working
tree, allow it to also update the index with the result of
resolution.  --no-rerere-autoupdate is a good way to
double-check what rerere did and catch potential
mismerges, before committing the result to the index with a
separate git add.

Silently overwrite ignored files from the merge result. This
is the default behavior. Use --no-overwrite-ignore to abort.

Abort the current conflict resolution process, and
try to reconstruct the pre-merge state. If an autostash entry is
present, apply it to the worktree.

If there were uncommitted worktree changes present when the merge
started, git merge --abort will in some cases be unable to
reconstruct these changes. It is therefore recommended to always
commit or stash your changes before running git merge.

git merge --abort is equivalent to git reset --merge when
MERGE_HEAD is present unless MERGE_AUTOSTASH is also present in
which case git merge --abort applies the stash entry to the worktree
whereas git reset --merge will save the stashed changes in the stash
list.

Forget about the current merge in progress. Leave the index
and the working tree as-is. If MERGE_AUTOSTASH is present, the
stash entry will be saved to the stash list.

After a git merge stops due to conflicts you can conclude the
merge by running git merge --continue (see "HOW TO RESOLVE
CONFLICTS" section below).

Commits, usually other branch heads, to merge into our branch.
Specifying more than one commit will create a merge with
more than two parents (affectionately called an Octopus merge).

If no commit is given from the command line, merge the remote-tracking
branches that the current branch is configured to use as its upstream.
See also the configuration section of this manual page.

When FETCH_HEAD (and no other commit) is specified, the branches
recorded in the .git/FETCH_HEAD file by the previous invocation
of git fetch for merging are merged to the current branch.

Before applying outside changes, you should get your own work in
good shape and committed locally, so it will not be clobbered if
there are conflicts.  See also git-stash[1].
git pull and git merge will stop without doing anything when
local uncommitted changes overlap with files that git pull/git
merge may need to update.

To avoid recording unrelated changes in the merge commit,
git pull and git merge will also abort if there are any changes
registered in the index relative to the HEAD commit.  (Special
narrow exceptions to this rule may exist depending on which merge
strategy is in use, but generally, the index must match HEAD.)

If all named commits are already ancestors of HEAD, git merge
will exit early with the message "Already up to date."

Often the current branch head is an ancestor of the named commit.
This is the most common case especially when invoked from git
pull: you are tracking an upstream repository, you have committed
no local changes, and now you want to update to a newer upstream
revision.  In this case, a new commit is not needed to store the
combined history; instead, the HEAD (along with the index) is
updated to point at the named commit, without creating an extra
merge commit.

This behavior can be suppressed with the --no-ff option.

Except in a fast-forward merge (see above), the branches to be
merged must be tied together by a merge commit that has both of them
as its parents.

A merged version reconciling the changes from all branches to be
merged is committed, and your HEAD, index, and working tree are
updated to it.  It is possible to have modifications in the working
tree as long as they do not overlap; the update will preserve them.

When it is not obvious how to reconcile the changes, the following
happens:

The HEAD pointer stays the same.

The MERGE_HEAD ref is set to point to the other branch head.

Paths that merged cleanly are updated both in the index file and
in your working tree.

For conflicting paths, the index file records up to three
versions: stage 1 stores the version from the common ancestor,
stage 2 from HEAD, and stage 3 from MERGE_HEAD (you
can inspect the stages with git ls-files -u).  The working
tree files contain the result of the merge operation; i.e. 3-way
merge results with familiar conflict markers <<< === >>>.

A ref named AUTO_MERGE is written, pointing to a tree
corresponding to the current content of the working tree (including
conflict markers for textual conflicts).  Note that this ref is only
written when the ort merge strategy is used (the default).

No other changes are made.  In particular, the local
modifications you had before you started merge will stay the
same and the index entries for them stay as they were,
i.e. matching HEAD.

If you tried a merge which resulted in complex conflicts and
want to start over, you can recover with git merge --abort.

When merging an annotated (and possibly signed) tag, Git always
creates a merge commit even if a fast-forward merge is possible, and
the commit message template is prepared with the tag message.
Additionally, if the tag is signed, the signature check is reported
as a comment in the message template. See also git-tag[1].

When you want to just integrate with the work leading to the commit
that happens to be tagged, e.g. synchronizing with an upstream
release point, you may not want to make an unnecessary merge commit.

In such a case, you can "unwrap" the tag yourself before feeding it
to git merge, or pass --ff-only when you do not have any work on
your own. e.g.

During a merge, the working tree files are updated to reflect the result
of the merge.  Among the changes made to the common ancestor’s version,
non-overlapping ones (that is, you changed an area of the file while the
other side left that area intact, or vice versa) are incorporated in the
final result verbatim.  When both sides made changes to the same area,
however, Git cannot randomly pick one side over the other, and asks you to
resolve it by leaving what both sides did to that area.

By default, Git uses the same style as the one used by the "merge" program
from the RCS suite to present such a conflicted hunk, like this:

The area where a pair of conflicting changes happened is marked with markers
<<<<<<<, =======, and >>>>>>>.  The part before the =======
is typically your side, and the part afterwards is typically their side.

The default format does not show what the original said in the conflicting
area.  You cannot tell how many lines are deleted and replaced with
Barbie’s remark on your side.  The only thing you can tell is that your
side wants to say it is hard and you’d prefer to go shopping, while the
other side wants to claim it is easy.

An alternative style can be used by setting the merge.conflictStyle
configuration variable to either diff3 or zdiff3.  In diff3
style, the above conflict may look like this:

while in zdiff3 style, it may look like this:

In addition to the <<<<<<<, =======, and >>>>>>> markers, it uses
another ||||||| marker that is followed by the original text.  You can
tell that the original just stated a fact, and your side simply gave in to
that statement and gave up, while the other side tried to have a more
positive attitude.  You can sometimes come up with a better resolution by
viewing the original.

After seeing a conflict, you can do two things:

Decide not to merge.  The only clean-ups you need are to reset
the index file to the HEAD commit to reverse 2. and to clean
up working tree changes made by 2. and 3.; git merge --abort
can be used for this.

Resolve the conflicts.  Git will mark the conflicts in
the working tree.  Edit the files into shape and
git add them to the index.  Use git commit or
git merge --continue to seal the deal. The latter command
checks whether there is a (interrupted) merge in progress
before calling git commit.

You can work through the conflict with a number of tools:

Use a mergetool.  git mergetool to launch a graphical
mergetool which will work through the merge with you.

Look at the diffs.  git diff will show a three-way diff,
highlighting changes from both the HEAD and MERGE_HEAD
versions. git diff AUTO_MERGE will show what changes you’ve
made so far to resolve textual conflicts.

Look at the diffs from each branch. git log --merge -p <path>
will show diffs first for the HEAD version and then the
MERGE_HEAD version.

Look at the originals.  git show :1:filename shows the
common ancestor, git show :2:filename shows the HEAD
version, and git show :3:filename shows the MERGE_HEAD
version.

Merge branches fixes and enhancements on top of
the current branch, making an octopus merge:

Merge branch obsolete into the current branch, using ours
merge strategy:

Merge branch maint into the current branch, but do not make
a new commit automatically:

This can be used when you want to include further changes to the
merge, or want to write your own merge commit message.

You should refrain from abusing this option to sneak substantial
changes into a merge commit.  Small fixups like bumping
release/version name would be acceptable.

The merge mechanism (git merge and git pull commands) allows the
backend merge strategies to be chosen with -s option.  Some strategies
can also take their own options, which can be passed by giving -X<option>
arguments to git merge and/or git pull.

This is the default merge strategy when pulling or merging one
branch.  This strategy can only resolve two heads using a
3-way merge algorithm.  When there is more than one common
ancestor that can be used for 3-way merge, it creates a merged
tree of the common ancestors and uses that as the reference
tree for the 3-way merge.  This has been reported to result in
fewer merge conflicts without causing mismerges by tests done
on actual merge commits taken from Linux 2.6 kernel
development history.  Additionally this strategy can detect
and handle merges involving renames.  It does not make use of
detected copies.  The name for this algorithm is an acronym
("Ostensibly Recursive’s Twin") and came from the fact that it
was written as a replacement for the previous default
algorithm, recursive.

In the case where the path is a submodule, if the submodule commit used on
one side of the merge is a descendant of the submodule commit used on the
other side of the merge, Git attempts to fast-forward to the
descendant. Otherwise, Git will treat this case as a conflict, suggesting
as a resolution a submodule commit that is descendant of the conflicting
ones, if one exists.

The ort strategy can take the following options:

This option forces conflicting hunks to be auto-resolved cleanly by
favoring our version.  Changes from the other tree that do not
conflict with our side are reflected in the merge result.
For a binary file, the entire contents are taken from our side.

This should not be confused with the ours merge strategy, which does not
even look at what the other tree contains at all.  It discards everything
the other tree did, declaring our history contains all that happened in it.

This is the opposite of ours; note that, unlike ours, there is
no theirs merge strategy to confuse this merge option with.

Treats lines with the indicated type of whitespace change as
unchanged for the sake of a three-way merge.  Whitespace
changes mixed with other changes to a line are not ignored.
See also git-diff[1] -b, -w,
--ignore-space-at-eol, and --ignore-cr-at-eol.

If their version only introduces whitespace changes to a line,
our version is used;

If our version introduces whitespace changes but their
version includes a substantial change, their version is used;

Otherwise, the merge proceeds in the usual way.

This runs a virtual check-out and check-in of all three stages
of any file which needs a three-way merge.  This option is
meant to be used when merging branches with different clean
filters or end-of-line normalization rules.  See "Merging
branches with differing checkin/checkout attributes" in
gitattributes[5] for details.

Disables the renormalize option.  This overrides the
merge.renormalize configuration variable.

Turn on rename detection, optionally setting the similarity
threshold.  This is the default. This overrides the
merge.renames configuration variable.
See also git-diff[1] --find-renames.

Deprecated synonym for find-renames=<n>.

Turn off rename detection. This overrides the merge.renames
configuration variable.
See also git-diff[1] --no-renames.

Deprecated synonym for diff-algorithm=histogram.

Deprecated synonym for diff-algorithm=patience.

Use a different diff algorithm while merging, which can help
avoid mismerges that occur due to unimportant matching lines
(such as braces from distinct functions).  See also
git-diff[1] --diff-algorithm.  Note that ort
defaults to diff-algorithm=histogram, while regular diffs
currently default to the diff.algorithm config setting.

This option is a more advanced form of subtree strategy, where
the strategy makes a guess on how two trees must be shifted to
match with each other when merging.  Instead, the specified path
is prefixed (or stripped from the beginning) to make the shape of
two trees to match.

This is now a synonym for ort.  It was an alternative
implementation until v2.49.0, but was redirected to mean ort
in v2.50.0.  The previous recursive strategy was the default
strategy for resolving two heads from Git v0.99.9k until
v2.33.0.

This can only resolve two heads (i.e. the current branch
and another branch you pulled from) using a 3-way merge
algorithm.  It tries to carefully detect criss-cross
merge ambiguities.  It does not handle renames.

This resolves cases with more than two heads, but refuses to do
a complex merge that needs manual resolution.  It is
primarily meant to be used for bundling topic branch
heads together.  This is the default merge strategy when
pulling or merging more than one branch.

This resolves any number of heads, but the resulting tree of the
merge is always that of the current branch head, effectively
ignoring all changes from all other branches.  It is meant to
be used to supersede old development history of side
branches.  Note that this is different from the -Xours option to
the ort merge strategy.

This is a modified ort strategy. When merging trees A and
B, if B corresponds to a subtree of A, B is first adjusted to
match the tree structure of A, instead of reading the trees at
the same level. This adjustment is also done to the common
ancestor tree.

With the strategies that use 3-way merge (including the default, ort),
if a change is made on both branches, but later reverted on one of the
branches, that change will be present in the merged result; some people find
this behavior confusing.  It occurs because only the heads and the merge base
are considered when performing a merge, not the individual commits.  The merge
algorithm therefore considers the reverted change as no change at all, and
substitutes the changed version instead.

Sets default options for merging into branch <name>. The syntax and
supported options are the same as those of git merge, but option
values containing whitespace characters are currently not supported.

Everything above this line in this section isn’t included from the
git-config[1] documentation. The content that follows is the
same as what’s found there:

Specify the style in which conflicted hunks are written out to
working tree files upon merge.  The default is "merge", which
shows a <<<<<<< conflict marker, changes made by one side,
a ======= marker, changes made by the other side, and then
a >>>>>>> marker.  An alternate style, "diff3", adds a |||||||
marker and the original text before the ======= marker.  The
"merge" style tends to produce smaller conflict regions than diff3,
both because of the exclusion of the original text, and because
when a subset of lines match on the two sides, they are just pulled
out of the conflict region.  Another alternate style, "zdiff3", is
similar to diff3 but removes matching lines on the two sides from
the conflict region when those matching lines appear near either
the beginning or end of a conflict region.

If merge is called without any commit argument, merge the upstream
branches configured for the current branch by using their last
observed values stored in their remote-tracking branches.
The values of the branch.<current branch>.merge that name the
branches at the remote named by branch.<current-branch>.remote
are consulted, and then they are mapped via remote.<remote>.fetch
to their corresponding remote-tracking branches, and the tips of
these tracking branches are merged. Defaults to true.

By default, Git does not create an extra merge commit when merging
a commit that is a descendant of the current commit. Instead, the
tip of the current branch is fast-forwarded. When set to false,
this variable tells Git to create an extra merge commit in such
a case (equivalent to giving the --no-ff option from the command
line). When set to only, only such fast-forward merges are
allowed (equivalent to giving the --ff-only option from the
command line).

If true, this is equivalent to the --verify-signatures command
line option. See git-merge[1] for details.

In addition to branch names, populate the log message with
the branch description text associated with them.  Defaults
to false.

In addition to branch names, populate the log message with at
most the specified number of one-line descriptions from the
actual commits that are being merged.  Defaults to false, and
true is a synonym for 20.

By adding a glob that matches the names of integration
branches to this multi-valued configuration variable, the
default merge message computed for merges into these
integration branches will omit "into <branch-name>" from
its title.

An element with an empty value can be used to clear the list
of globs accumulated from previous configuration entries.
When there is no merge.suppressDest variable defined, the
default value of master is used for backward compatibility.

The number of files to consider in the exhaustive portion of
rename detection during a merge.  If not specified, defaults
to the value of diff.renameLimit.  If neither
merge.renameLimit nor diff.renameLimit are specified,
currently defaults to 7000.  This setting has no effect if
rename detection is turned off.

Whether Git detects renames.  If set to false, rename detection
is disabled. If set to true, basic rename detection is enabled.
Defaults to the value of diff.renames.

Whether Git detects directory renames, affecting what happens at
merge time to new files added to a directory on one side of
history when that directory was renamed on the other side of
history. Possible values are:

Directory rename detection is disabled, meaning that such new files will be
left behind in the old directory.

Directory rename detection is enabled, meaning that such new files will be
moved into the new directory.

A conflict will be reported for such paths.

If merge.renames is false, merge.directoryRenames is ignored and treated
as false. Defaults to conflict.

Tell Git that canonical representation of files in the
repository has changed over time (e.g. earlier commits record
text files with CRLF line endings, but recent ones use LF line
endings).  In such a repository, for each file where a
three-way content merge is needed, Git can convert the data
recorded in commits to a canonical form before performing a
merge to reduce unnecessary conflicts.  For more information,
see section "Merging branches with differing checkin/checkout
attributes" in gitattributes[5].

What, if anything, to print between ORIG_HEAD and the merge result
at the end of the merge.  Possible values are:

Show nothing.

Show git diff --diffstat --summary ORIG_HEAD.

Show git diff --compact-summary ORIG_HEAD.

but any unrecognised value (e.g., a value added by a future version of
Git) is taken as true instead of triggering an error.  Defaults to
true.

When set to true, automatically create a temporary stash entry
before the operation begins, and apply it after the operation
ends.  This means that you can run merge on a dirty worktree.
However, use with care: the final stash application after a
successful merge might result in non-trivial conflicts.
This option can be overridden by the --no-autostash and
--autostash options of git-merge[1].
Defaults to false.

Controls which merge tool is used by git-mergetool[1].
The list below shows the valid built-in values.
Any other value is treated as a custom merge tool and requires
that a corresponding mergetool.<tool>.cmd variable is defined.

Controls which merge tool is used by git-mergetool[1] when the
-g/--gui flag is specified. The list below shows the valid built-in values.
Any other value is treated as a custom merge tool and requires that a
corresponding mergetool.<guitool>.cmd variable is defined.

araxis

bc

codecompare

deltawalker

diffmerge

diffuse

ecmerge

emerge

examdiff

guiffy

gvimdiff

kdiff3

meld

nvimdiff

opendiff

p4merge

smerge

tkdiff

tortoisemerge

vimdiff

vscode

winmerge

xxdiff

Controls the amount of output shown by the recursive merge
strategy.  Level 0 outputs nothing except a final error
message if conflicts were detected. Level 1 outputs only
conflicts, 2 outputs conflicts and file changes.  Level 5 and
above outputs debugging information.  The default is level 2.
Can be overridden by the GIT_MERGE_VERBOSITY environment variable.

Defines a human-readable name for a custom low-level
merge driver.  See gitattributes[5] for details.

Defines the command that implements a custom low-level
merge driver.  See gitattributes[5] for details.

Names a low-level merge driver to be used when
performing an internal merge between common ancestors.
See gitattributes[5] for details.

git-fmt-merge-msg[1], git-pull[1],
gitattributes[5],
git-reset[1],
git-diff[1], git-ls-files[1],
git-add[1], git-rm[1],
git-mergetool[1]

Part of the git[1] suite