Title: Conditional branching: if, '?'
Source: https://javascript.info/ifelse

Sometimes, we need to perform different actions based on different conditions.

To do that, we can use the if statement and the conditional operator ?, that’s also called a “question mark” operator.

The if(...) statement evaluates a condition in parentheses and, if the result is true, executes a block of code.

For example:

In the example above, the condition is a simple equality check (year == 2015), but it can be much more complex.

If we want to execute more than one statement, we have to wrap our code block inside curly braces:

We recommend wrapping your code block with curly braces {} every time you use an if statement, even if there is only one statement to execute. Doing so improves readability.

The if (…) statement evaluates the expression in its parentheses and converts the result to a boolean.

Let’s recall the conversion rules from the chapter Type Conversions:

So, the code under this condition would never execute:

…and inside this condition – it always will:

We can also pass a pre-evaluated boolean value to if, like this:

The if statement may contain an optional else block. It executes when the condition is falsy.

For example:

Sometimes, we’d like to test several variants of a condition. The else if clause lets us do that.

For example:

In the code above, JavaScript first checks year < 2015. If that is falsy, it goes to the next condition year > 2015. If that is also falsy, it shows the last alert.

There can be more else if blocks. The final else is optional.

Sometimes, we need to assign a variable depending on a condition.

For instance:

The so-called “conditional” or “question mark” operator lets us do that in a shorter and simpler way.

The operator is represented by a question mark ?. Sometimes it’s called “ternary”, because the operator has three operands. It is actually the one and only operator in JavaScript which has that many.

The syntax is:

The condition is evaluated: if it’s truthy then value1 is returned, otherwise – value2.

For example:

Technically, we can omit the parentheses around age > 18. The question mark operator has a low precedence, so it executes after the comparison >.

This example will do the same thing as the previous one:

But parentheses make the code more readable, so we recommend using them.

In the example above, you can avoid using the question mark operator because the comparison itself returns true/false:

A sequence of question mark operators ? can return a value that depends on more than one condition.

For instance:

It may be difficult at first to grasp what’s going on. But after a closer look, we can see that it’s just an ordinary sequence of tests:

Here’s how this looks using if..else:

Sometimes the question mark ? is used as a replacement for if:

Depending on the condition company == 'Netscape', either the first or the second expression after the ? gets executed and shows an alert.

We don’t assign a result to a variable here. Instead, we execute different code depending on the condition.

It’s not recommended to use the question mark operator in this way.

The notation is shorter than the equivalent if statement, which appeals to some programmers. But it is less readable.

Here is the same code using if for comparison:

Our eyes scan the code vertically. Code blocks which span several lines are easier to understand than a long, horizontal instruction set.

The purpose of the question mark operator ? is to return one value or another depending on its condition. Please use it for exactly that. Use if when you need to execute different branches of code.