Title: Promise API
Source: https://javascript.info/promise-api

There are 6 static methods in the Promise class. We’ll quickly cover their use cases here.

Let’s say we want many promises to execute in parallel and wait until all of them are ready.

For instance, download several URLs in parallel and process the content once they are all done.

That’s what Promise.all is for.

The syntax is:

Promise.all takes an iterable (usually, an array of promises) and returns a new promise.

The new promise resolves when all listed promises are resolved, and the array of their results becomes its result.

For instance, the Promise.all below settles after 3 seconds, and then its result is an array [1, 2, 3]:

Please note that the order of the resulting array members is the same as in its source promises. Even though the first promise takes the longest time to resolve, it’s still first in the array of results.

A common trick is to map an array of job data into an array of promises, and then wrap that into Promise.all.

For instance, if we have an array of URLs, we can fetch them all like this:

A bigger example with fetching user information for an array of GitHub users by their names (we could fetch an array of goods by their ids, the logic is identical):

If any of the promises is rejected, the promise returned by Promise.all immediately rejects with that error.

For instance:

Here the second promise rejects in two seconds. That leads to an immediate rejection of Promise.all, so .catch executes: the rejection error becomes the outcome of the entire Promise.all.

If one promise rejects, Promise.all immediately rejects, completely forgetting about the other ones in the list. Their results are ignored.

For example, if there are multiple fetch calls, like in the example above, and one fails, the others will still continue to execute, but Promise.all won’t watch them anymore. They will probably settle, but their results will be ignored.

Promise.all does nothing to cancel them, as there’s no concept of “cancellation” in promises. In another chapter we’ll cover AbortController that can help with that, but it’s not a part of the Promise API.

Normally, Promise.all(...) accepts an iterable (in most cases an array) of promises. But if any of those objects is not a promise, it’s passed to the resulting array “as is”.

For instance, here the results are [1, 2, 3]:

So we are able to pass ready values to Promise.all where convenient.

Promise.all rejects as a whole if any promise rejects. That’s good for “all or nothing” cases, when we need all results successful to proceed:

Promise.allSettled just waits for all promises to settle, regardless of the result. The resulting array has:

For example, we’d like to fetch the information about multiple users. Even if one request fails, we’re still interested in the others.

Let’s use Promise.allSettled:

The results in the line (*) above will be:

So for each promise we get its status and value/error.

If the browser doesn’t support Promise.allSettled, it’s easy to polyfill:

In this code, promises.map takes input values, turns them into promises (just in case a non-promise was passed) with p => Promise.resolve(p), and then adds .then handler to every one.

That handler turns a successful result value into {status:'fulfilled', value}, and an error reason into {status:'rejected', reason}. That’s exactly the format of Promise.allSettled.

Now we can use Promise.allSettled to get the results of all given promises, even if some of them reject.

Similar to Promise.all, but waits only for the first settled promise and gets its result (or error).

The syntax is:

For instance, here the result will be 1:

The first promise here was fastest, so it became the result. After the first settled promise “wins the race”, all further results/errors are ignored.

Similar to Promise.race, but waits only for the first fulfilled promise and gets its result. If all of the given promises are rejected, then the returned promise is rejected with AggregateError – a special error object that stores all promise errors in its errors property.

The syntax is:

For instance, here the result will be 1:

The first promise here was fastest, but it was rejected, so the second promise became the result. After the first fulfilled promise “wins the race”, all further results are ignored.

Here’s an example when all promises fail:

As you can see, error objects for failed promises are available in the errors property of the AggregateError object.

Methods Promise.resolve and Promise.reject are rarely needed in modern code, because async/await syntax (we’ll cover it a bit later) makes them somewhat obsolete.

We cover them here for completeness and for those who can’t use async/await for some reason.

Promise.resolve(value) creates a resolved promise with the result value.

Same as:

The method is used for compatibility, when a function is expected to return a promise.

For example, the loadCached function below fetches a URL and remembers (caches) its content. For future calls with the same URL it immediately gets the previous content from cache, but uses Promise.resolve to make a promise of it, so the returned value is always a promise:

We can write loadCached(url).then(…), because the function is guaranteed to return a promise. We can always use .then after loadCached. That’s the purpose of Promise.resolve in the line (*).

Promise.reject(error) creates a rejected promise with error.

Same as:

In practice, this method is almost never used.

There are 6 static methods of Promise class:

Of all these, Promise.all is probably the most common in practice.