Title: JavaScript specials
Source: https://javascript.info/javascript-specials

This chapter briefly recaps the features of JavaScript that we’ve learned by now, paying special attention to subtle moments.

Statements are delimited with a semicolon:

Usually, a line-break is also treated as a delimiter, so that would also work:

That’s called “automatic semicolon insertion”. Sometimes it doesn’t work, for instance:

Most codestyle guides agree that we should put a semicolon after each statement.

Semicolons are not required after code blocks {...} and syntax constructs with them like loops:

…But even if we can put an “extra” semicolon somewhere, that’s not an error. It will be ignored.

More in: Code structure.

To fully enable all features of modern JavaScript, we should start scripts with "use strict".

The directive must be at the top of a script or at the beginning of a function body.

Without "use strict", everything still works, but some features behave in the old-fashioned, “compatible” way. We’d generally prefer the modern behavior.

Some modern features of the language (like classes that we’ll study in the future) enable strict mode implicitly.

More in: The modern mode, "use strict".

Can be declared using:

A variable name can include:

Variables are dynamically typed. They can store any value:

There are 8 data types:

The typeof operator returns the type for a value, with two exceptions:

More in: Variables and Data types.

We’re using a browser as a working environment, so basic UI functions will be:

All these functions are modal, they pause the code execution and prevent the visitor from interacting with the page until they answer.

For instance:

More in: Interaction: alert, prompt, confirm.

JavaScript supports the following operators:

Regular: * + - /, also % for the remainder and ** for power of a number.

The binary plus + concatenates strings. And if any of the operands is a string, the other one is converted to string too:

There is a simple assignment: a = b and combined ones like a *= 2.

Bitwise operators work with 32-bit integers at the lowest, bit-level: see the docs when they are needed.

The only operator with three parameters: cond ? resultA : resultB. If cond is truthy, returns resultA, otherwise resultB.

Logical AND && and OR || perform short-circuit evaluation and then return the value where it stopped (not necessary true/false). Logical NOT ! converts the operand to boolean type and returns the inverse value.

The ?? operator provides a way to choose a defined value from a list of variables. The result of a ?? b is a unless it’s null/undefined, then b.

Equality check == for values of different types converts them to a number (except null and undefined that equal each other and nothing else), so these are equal:

Other comparisons convert to a number as well.

The strict equality operator === doesn’t do the conversion: different types always mean different values for it.

Values null and undefined are special: they equal == each other and don’t equal anything else.

Greater/less comparisons compare strings character-by-character, other types are converted to a number.

There are few others, like a comma operator.

More in: Basic operators, maths, Comparisons, Logical operators, Nullish coalescing operator '??'.

We covered 3 types of loops:

The variable declared in for(let...) loop is visible only inside the loop. But we can also omit let and reuse an existing variable.

Directives break/continue allow to exit the whole loop/current iteration. Use labels to break nested loops.

Details in: Loops: while and for.

Later we’ll study more types of loops to deal with objects.

The “switch” construct can replace multiple if checks. It uses === (strict equality) for comparisons.

For instance:

Details in: The "switch" statement.

We covered three ways to create a function in JavaScript:

Function Declaration: the function in the main code flow

Function Expression: the function in the context of an expression

Arrow functions:

Details: see Functions, Arrow functions, the basics.

That was a brief list of JavaScript features. As of now we’ve studied only basics. Further in the tutorial you’ll find more specials and advanced features of JavaScript.