Title: Comments
Source: https://javascript.info/comments

As we know from the chapter Code structure, comments can be single-line: starting with // and multiline: /* ... */.

We normally use them to describe how and why the code works.

At first sight, commenting might be obvious, but novices in programming often use them wrongly.

Novices tend to use comments to explain “what is going on in the code”. Like this:

But in good code, the amount of such “explanatory” comments should be minimal. Seriously, the code should be easy to understand without them.

There’s a great rule about that: “if the code is so unclear that it requires a comment, then maybe it should be rewritten instead”.

Sometimes it’s beneficial to replace a code piece with a function, like here:

The better variant, with a factored out function isPrime:

Now we can understand the code easily. The function itself becomes the comment. Such code is called self-descriptive.

And if we have a long “code sheet” like this:

Then it might be a better variant to refactor it into functions like:

Once again, functions themselves tell what’s going on. There’s nothing to comment. And also the code structure is better when split. It’s clear what every function does, what it takes and what it returns.

In reality, we can’t totally avoid “explanatory” comments. There are complex algorithms. And there are smart “tweaks” for purposes of optimization. But generally we should try to keep the code simple and self-descriptive.

So, explanatory comments are usually bad. Which comments are good?

For instance:

Such comments allow us to understand the purpose of the function and use it the right way without looking in its code.

By the way, many editors like WebStorm can understand them as well and use them to provide autocomplete and some automatic code-checking.

Also, there are tools like JSDoc 3 that can generate HTML-documentation from the comments. You can read more information about JSDoc at https://jsdoc.app.

What’s written is important. But what’s not written may be even more important to understand what’s going on. Why is the task solved exactly this way? The code gives no answer.

If there are many ways to solve the task, why this one? Especially when it’s not the most obvious one.

Without such comments the following situation is possible:

Comments that explain the solution are very important. They help to continue development the right way.

If the code has anything subtle and counter-intuitive, it’s definitely worth commenting.

An important sign of a good developer is comments: their presence and even their absence.

Good comments allow us to maintain the code well, come back to it after a delay and use it more effectively.

Comment this:

Avoid comments:

Comments are also used for auto-documenting tools like JSDoc3: they read them and generate HTML-docs (or docs in another format).