Title: Microtasks
Source: https://javascript.info/microtask-queue

Promise handlers .then/.catch/.finally are always asynchronous.

Even when a Promise is immediately resolved, the code on the lines below .then/.catch/.finally will still execute before these handlers.

Here’s a demo:

If you run it, you see code finished first, and then promise done!.

That’s strange, because the promise is definitely done from the beginning.

Why did the .then trigger afterwards? What’s going on?

Asynchronous tasks need proper management. For that, the ECMA standard specifies an internal queue PromiseJobs, more often referred to as the “microtask queue” (V8 term).

As stated in the specification:

Or, to put it more simply, when a promise is ready, its .then/catch/finally handlers are put into the queue; they are not executed yet. When the JavaScript engine becomes free from the current code, it takes a task from the queue and executes it.

That’s why “code finished” in the example above shows first.

Promise handlers always go through this internal queue.

If there’s a chain with multiple .then/catch/finally, then every one of them is executed asynchronously. That is, it first gets queued, then executed when the current code is complete and previously queued handlers are finished.

What if the order matters for us? How can we make code finished appear after promise done?

Easy, just put it into the queue with .then:

Now the order is as intended.

Remember the unhandledrejection event from the article Error handling with promises?

Now we can see exactly how JavaScript finds out that there was an unhandled rejection.

An “unhandled rejection” occurs when a promise error is not handled at the end of the microtask queue.

Normally, if we expect an error, we add .catch to the promise chain to handle it:

But if we forget to add .catch, then, after the microtask queue is empty, the engine triggers the event:

What if we handle the error later? Like this:

Now, if we run it, we’ll see Promise Failed! first and then caught.

If we didn’t know about the microtasks queue, we could wonder: “Why did unhandledrejection handler run? We did catch and handle the error!”

But now we understand that unhandledrejection is generated when the microtask queue is complete: the engine examines promises and, if any of them is in the “rejected” state, then the event triggers.

In the example above, .catch added by setTimeout also triggers. But it does so later, after unhandledrejection has already occurred, so it doesn’t change anything.

Promise handling is always asynchronous, as all promise actions pass through the internal “promise jobs” queue, also called “microtask queue” (V8 term).

So .then/catch/finally handlers are always called after the current code is finished.

If we need to guarantee that a piece of code is executed after .then/catch/finally, we can add it into a chained .then call.

In most Javascript engines, including browsers and Node.js, the concept of microtasks is closely tied with the “event loop” and “macrotasks”. As these have no direct relation to promises, they are covered in another part of the tutorial, in the article Event loop: microtasks and macrotasks.