Title: Reference | Kubernetes
Source: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/

This section of the Kubernetes documentation contains references.

Glossary - a comprehensive, standardized list of Kubernetes terminology

Kubernetes API Reference

One-page API Reference for Kubernetes v1.35

Using The Kubernetes API - overview of the API for Kubernetes.

API access control - details on how Kubernetes controls API access

Well-Known Labels, Annotations and Taints

To call the Kubernetes API from a programming language, you can use
client libraries. Officially supported
client libraries:

kubelet - The
primary agent that runs on each node. The kubelet takes a set of PodSpecs
and ensures that the described containers are running and healthy.

kube-apiserver -
REST API that validates and configures data for API objects such as pods,
services, replication controllers.

kube-controller-manager -
Daemon that embeds the core control loops shipped with Kubernetes.

kube-proxy - Can
do simple TCP/UDP stream forwarding or round-robin TCP/UDP forwarding across
a set of back-ends.

kube-scheduler -
Scheduler that manages availability, performance, and capacity.

List of ports and protocols that
should be open on control plane and worker nodes

This section hosts the documentation for "unpublished" APIs which are used to
configure kubernetes components or tools. Most of these APIs are not exposed
by the API server in a RESTful way though they are essential for a user or an
operator to use or manage a cluster.

These are the APIs defined by the Kubernetes project, but are not implemented
by the core project:

An archive of the design docs for Kubernetes functionality. Good starting points are
Kubernetes Architecture and
Kubernetes Design Overview.

Tools such as kubectl
can work with different formats / encodings. These include:

Kubernetes also has a custom protobuf encoding that is only used within HTTP messages.

The kubectl tool supports some other output formats, such as custom columns;
see output formats in the kubectl reference.

Was this page helpful?

Thanks for the feedback. If you have a specific, answerable question about how to use Kubernetes, ask it on
Stack Overflow.
Open an issue in the GitHub Repository if you want to
report a problem
or
suggest an improvement.