Title: Path | Node.js v25.6.0 Documentation
Source: https://nodejs.org/api/path.html

Source Code: lib/path.js

The node:path module provides utilities for working with file and directory
paths. It can be accessed using:

The default operation of the node:path module varies based on the operating
system on which a Node.js application is running. Specifically, when running on
a Windows operating system, the node:path module will assume that
Windows-style paths are being used.

So using path.basename() might yield different results on POSIX and Windows:

On POSIX:

On Windows:

To achieve consistent results when working with Windows file paths on any
operating system, use path.win32:

On POSIX and Windows:

To achieve consistent results when working with POSIX file paths on any
operating system, use path.posix:

On POSIX and Windows:

On Windows Node.js follows the concept of per-drive working directory.
This behavior can be observed when using a drive path without a backslash. For
example, path.resolve('C:\\') can potentially return a different result than
path.resolve('C:'). For more information, see
this MSDN page.

Passing a non-string as the path argument will throw now.

Added in: v0.1.25

The path.basename() method returns the last portion of a path, similar to
the Unix basename command. Trailing directory separators are
ignored.

Although Windows usually treats file names, including file extensions, in a
case-insensitive manner, this function does not. For example, C:\\foo.html and
C:\\foo.HTML refer to the same file, but basename treats the extension as a
case-sensitive string:

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string or if suffix is given
and is not a string.

Provides the platform-specific path delimiter:

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

Passing a non-string as the path argument will throw now.

Added in: v0.1.16

The path.dirname() method returns the directory name of a path, similar to
the Unix dirname command. Trailing directory separators are ignored, see
path.sep.

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string.

Passing a non-string as the path argument will throw now.

Added in: v0.1.25

The path.extname() method returns the extension of the path, from the last
occurrence of the . (period) character to end of string in the last portion of
the path. If there is no . in the last portion of the path, or if
there are no . characters other than the first character of
the basename of path (see path.basename()) , an empty string is returned.

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string.

The dot will be added if it is not specified in ext.

Added in: v0.11.15

The path.format() method returns a path string from an object. This is the
opposite of path.parse().

When providing properties to the pathObject remember that there are
combinations where one property has priority over another:

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

Marking the API stable.

Added in: v22.5.0, v20.17.0

The path.matchesGlob() method determines if path matches the pattern.

For example:

A TypeError is thrown if path or pattern are not strings.

The path.isAbsolute() method determines if the literal path is absolute.
Therefore, it’s not safe for mitigating path traversals.

If the given path is a zero-length string, false will be returned.

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string.

The path.join() method joins all given path segments together using the
platform-specific separator as a delimiter, then normalizes the resulting path.

Zero-length path segments are ignored. If the joined path string is a
zero-length string then '.' will be returned, representing the current
working directory.

A TypeError is thrown if any of the path segments is not a string.

The path.normalize() method normalizes the given path, resolving '..' and
'.' segments.

When multiple, sequential path segment separation characters are found (e.g.
/ on POSIX and either \ or / on Windows), they are replaced by a single
instance of the platform-specific path segment separator (/ on POSIX and
\ on Windows). Trailing separators are preserved.

If the path is a zero-length string, '.' is returned, representing the
current working directory.

On POSIX, the types of normalization applied by this function do not strictly
adhere to the POSIX specification. For example, this function will replace two
leading forward slashes with a single slash as if it was a regular absolute
path, whereas a few POSIX systems assign special meaning to paths beginning with
exactly two forward slashes. Similarly, other substitutions performed by this
function, such as removing .. segments, may change how the underlying system
resolves the path.

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

Since Windows recognizes multiple path separators, both separators will be
replaced by instances of the Windows preferred separator (\):

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string.

The path.parse() method returns an object whose properties represent
significant elements of the path. Trailing directory separators are ignored,
see path.sep.

The returned object will have the following properties:

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

A TypeError is thrown if path is not a string.

Exposed as require('path/posix').

Added in: v0.11.15

The path.posix property provides access to POSIX specific implementations
of the path methods.

The API is accessible via require('node:path').posix or require('node:path/posix').

On Windows, the leading slashes for UNC paths are now included in the return value.

Added in: v0.5.0

The path.relative() method returns the relative path from from to to based
on the current working directory. If from and to each resolve to the same
path (after calling path.resolve() on each), a zero-length string is returned.

If a zero-length string is passed as from or to, the current working
directory will be used instead of the zero-length strings.

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

A TypeError is thrown if either from or to is not a string.

The path.resolve() method resolves a sequence of paths or path segments into
an absolute path.

The given sequence of paths is processed from right to left, with each
subsequent path prepended until an absolute path is constructed.
For instance, given the sequence of path segments: /foo, /bar, baz,
calling path.resolve('/foo', '/bar', 'baz') would return /bar/baz
because 'baz' is not an absolute path but '/bar' + '/' + 'baz' is.

If, after processing all given path segments, an absolute path has not yet
been generated, the current working directory is used.

The resulting path is normalized and trailing slashes are removed unless the
path is resolved to the root directory.

Zero-length path segments are ignored.

If no path segments are passed, path.resolve() will return the absolute path
of the current working directory.

A TypeError is thrown if any of the arguments is not a string.

Provides the platform-specific path segment separator:

For example, on POSIX:

On Windows:

On Windows, both the forward slash (/) and backward slash (\) are accepted
as path segment separators; however, the path methods only add backward
slashes (\).

On Windows systems only, returns an equivalent namespace-prefixed path for
the given path. If path is not a string, path will be returned without
modifications.

This method is meaningful only on Windows systems. On POSIX systems, the
method is non-operational and always returns path without modifications.

Exposed as require('path/win32').

Added in: v0.11.15

The path.win32 property provides access to Windows-specific implementations
of the path methods.

The API is accessible via require('node:path').win32 or require('node:path/win32').