Title: HTTP | Node.js v25.6.0 Documentation
Source: https://nodejs.org/api/http.html

Source Code: lib/http.js

This module, containing both a client and server, can be imported via
require('node:http') (CommonJS) or import * as http from 'node:http' (ES module).

The HTTP interfaces in Node.js are designed to support many features
of the protocol which have been traditionally difficult to use.
In particular, large, possibly chunk-encoded, messages. The interface is
careful to never buffer entire requests or responses, so the
user is able to stream data.

HTTP message headers are represented by an object like this:

Keys are lowercased. Values are not modified.

In order to support the full spectrum of possible HTTP applications, the Node.js
HTTP API is very low-level. It deals with stream handling and message
parsing only. It parses a message into headers and body but it does not
parse the actual headers or the body.

See message.headers for details on how duplicate headers are handled.

The raw headers as they were received are retained in the rawHeaders
property, which is an array of [key, value, key2, value2, ...]. For
example, the previous message header object might have a rawHeaders
list like the following:

An Agent is responsible for managing connection persistence
and reuse for HTTP clients. It maintains a queue of pending requests
for a given host and port, reusing a single socket connection for each
until the queue is empty, at which time the socket is either destroyed
or put into a pool where it is kept to be used again for requests to the
same host and port. Whether it is destroyed or pooled depends on the
keepAlive option.

Pooled connections have TCP Keep-Alive enabled for them, but servers may
still close idle connections, in which case they will be removed from the
pool and a new connection will be made when a new HTTP request is made for
that host and port. Servers may also refuse to allow multiple requests
over the same connection, in which case the connection will have to be
remade for every request and cannot be pooled. The Agent will still make
the requests to that server, but each one will occur over a new connection.

When a connection is closed by the client or the server, it is removed
from the pool. Any unused sockets in the pool will be unrefed so as not
to keep the Node.js process running when there are no outstanding requests.
(see socket.unref()).

It is good practice, to destroy() an Agent instance when it is no
longer in use, because unused sockets consume OS resources.

Sockets are removed from an agent when the socket emits either
a 'close' event or an 'agentRemove' event. When intending to keep one
HTTP request open for a long time without keeping it in the agent, something
like the following may be done:

An agent may also be used for an individual request. By providing
{agent: false} as an option to the http.get() or http.request()
functions, a one-time use Agent with default options will be used
for the client connection.

agent:false:

Add support for proxyEnv.

Add support for defaultPort and protocol.

Add support for agentKeepAliveTimeoutBuffer.

Change the default scheduling from 'fifo' to 'lifo'.

Add scheduling option to specify the free socket scheduling strategy.

Add maxTotalSockets option to agent constructor.

Added in: v0.3.4

options in socket.connect() are also supported.

To configure any of them, a custom http.Agent instance must be created.

Produces a socket/stream to be used for HTTP requests.

By default, this function behaves identically to net.createConnection(),
synchronously returning the created socket. The optional callback parameter in the
signature is not used by this default implementation.

However, custom agents may override this method to provide greater flexibility,
for example, to create sockets asynchronously. When overriding createConnection:

The agent will call the provided createConnection function with options and
this internal callback. The callback provided by the agent has a signature
of (err, stream).

Called when socket is detached from a request and could be persisted by the
Agent. Default behavior is to:

This method can be overridden by a particular Agent subclass. If this
method returns a falsy value, the socket will be destroyed instead of persisting
it for use with the next request.

The socket argument can be an instance of <net.Socket>, a subclass of
<stream.Duplex>.

Called when socket is attached to request after being persisted because of
the keep-alive options. Default behavior is to:

This method can be overridden by a particular Agent subclass.

The socket argument can be an instance of <net.Socket>, a subclass of
<stream.Duplex>.

Destroy any sockets that are currently in use by the agent.

It is usually not necessary to do this. However, if using an
agent with keepAlive enabled, then it is best to explicitly shut down
the agent when it is no longer needed. Otherwise,
sockets might stay open for quite a long time before the server
terminates them.

The property now has a null prototype.

Added in: v0.11.4

An object which contains arrays of sockets currently awaiting use by
the agent when keepAlive is enabled. Do not modify.

Sockets in the freeSockets list will be automatically destroyed and
removed from the array on 'timeout'.

The options parameter is now optional.

Added in: v0.11.4

Get a unique name for a set of request options, to determine whether a
connection can be reused. For an HTTP agent, this returns
host:port:localAddress or host:port:localAddress:family. For an HTTPS agent,
the name includes the CA, cert, ciphers, and other HTTPS/TLS-specific options
that determine socket reusability.

By default set to 256. For agents with keepAlive enabled, this
sets the maximum number of sockets that will be left open in the free
state.

By default set to Infinity. Determines how many concurrent sockets the agent
can have open per origin. Origin is the returned value of agent.getName().

By default set to Infinity. Determines how many concurrent sockets the agent
can have open. Unlike maxSockets, this parameter applies across all origins.

The property now has a null prototype.

Added in: v0.5.9

An object which contains queues of requests that have not yet been assigned to
sockets. Do not modify.

The property now has a null prototype.

Added in: v0.3.6

An object which contains arrays of sockets currently in use by the
agent. Do not modify.

This object is created internally and returned from http.request(). It
represents an in-progress request whose header has already been queued. The
header is still mutable using the setHeader(name, value),
getHeader(name), removeHeader(name) API. The actual header will
be sent along with the first data chunk or when calling request.end().

To get the response, add a listener for 'response' to the request object.
'response' will be emitted from the request object when the response
headers have been received. The 'response' event is executed with one
argument which is an instance of http.IncomingMessage.

During the 'response' event, one can add listeners to the
response object; particularly to listen for the 'data' event.

If no 'response' handler is added, then the response will be
entirely discarded. However, if a 'response' event handler is added,
then the data from the response object must be consumed, either by
calling response.read() whenever there is a 'readable' event, or
by adding a 'data' handler, or by calling the .resume() method.
Until the data is consumed, the 'end' event will not fire. Also, until
the data is read it will consume memory that can eventually lead to a
'process out of memory' error.

For backward compatibility, res will only emit 'error' if there is an
'error' listener registered.

Set Content-Length header to limit the response body size.
If response.strictContentLength is set to true, mismatching the
Content-Length header value will result in an Error being thrown,
identified by code: 'ERR_HTTP_CONTENT_LENGTH_MISMATCH'.

Content-Length value should be in bytes, not characters. Use
Buffer.byteLength() to determine the length of the body in bytes.

Emitted when the request has been aborted by the client. This event is only
emitted on the first call to abort().

Indicates that the request is completed, or its underlying connection was
terminated prematurely (before the response completion).

Emitted each time a server responds to a request with a CONNECT method. If
this event is not being listened for, clients receiving a CONNECT method will
have their connections closed.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

A client and server pair demonstrating how to listen for the 'connect' event:

Emitted when the server sends a '100 Continue' HTTP response, usually because
the request contained 'Expect: 100-continue'. This is an instruction that
the client should send the request body.

Emitted when the request has been sent. More specifically, this event is emitted
when the last segment of the request headers and body have been handed off to
the operating system for transmission over the network. It does not imply that
the server has received anything yet.

Emitted when the server sends a 1xx intermediate response (excluding 101
Upgrade). The listeners of this event will receive an object containing the
HTTP version, status code, status message, key-value headers object,
and array with the raw header names followed by their respective values.

101 Upgrade statuses do not fire this event due to their break from the
traditional HTTP request/response chain, such as web sockets, in-place TLS
upgrades, or HTTP 2.0. To be notified of 101 Upgrade notices, listen for the
'upgrade' event instead.

Emitted when a response is received to this request. This event is emitted only
once.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

Emitted when the underlying socket times out from inactivity. This only notifies
that the socket has been idle. The request must be destroyed manually.

See also: request.setTimeout().

Emitted each time a server responds to a request with an upgrade. If this
event is not being listened for and the response status code is 101 Switching
Protocols, clients receiving an upgrade header will have their connections
closed.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

A client server pair demonstrating how to listen for the 'upgrade' event.

Marks the request as aborting. Calling this will cause remaining data
in the response to be dropped and the socket to be destroyed.

Deprecated since: v17.0.0, v16.12.0

The aborted property is no longer a timestamp number.

Added in: v0.11.14

The request.aborted property will be true if the request has
been aborted.

See request.socket.

See writable.cork().

The data parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

This method now returns a reference to ClientRequest.

Added in: v0.1.90

Finishes sending the request. If any parts of the body are
unsent, it will flush them to the stream. If the request is
chunked, this will send the terminating '0\r\n\r\n'.

If data is specified, it is equivalent to calling
request.write(data, encoding) followed by request.end(callback).

If callback is specified, it will be called when the request stream
is finished.

The function returns this for consistency with other Readable streams.

Added in: v0.3.0

Destroy the request. Optionally emit an 'error' event,
and emit a 'close' event. Calling this will cause remaining data
in the response to be dropped and the socket to be destroyed.

See writable.destroy() for further details.

Is true after request.destroy() has been called.

See writable.destroyed for further details.

The request.finished property will be true if request.end()
has been called. request.end() will automatically be called if the
request was initiated via http.get().

Flushes the request headers.

For efficiency reasons, Node.js normally buffers the request headers until
request.end() is called or the first chunk of request data is written. It
then tries to pack the request headers and data into a single TCP packet.

That's usually desired (it saves a TCP round-trip), but not when the first
data is not sent until possibly much later. request.flushHeaders() bypasses
the optimization and kickstarts the request.

Reads out a header on the request. The name is case-insensitive.
The type of the return value depends on the arguments provided to
request.setHeader().

Returns an array containing the unique names of the current outgoing headers.
All header names are lowercase.

Returns a shallow copy of the current outgoing headers. Since a shallow copy
is used, array values may be mutated without additional calls to various
header-related http module methods. The keys of the returned object are the
header names and the values are the respective header values. All header names
are lowercase.

The object returned by the request.getHeaders() method does not
prototypically inherit from the JavaScript Object. This means that typical
Object methods such as obj.toString(), obj.hasOwnProperty(), and others
are not defined and will not work.

Returns an array containing the unique names of the current outgoing raw
headers. Header names are returned with their exact casing being set.

Returns true if the header identified by name is currently set in the
outgoing headers. The header name matching is case-insensitive.

Limits maximum response headers count. If set to 0, no limit will be applied.

Removes a header that's already defined into headers object.

When sending request through a keep-alive enabled agent, the underlying socket
might be reused. But if server closes connection at unfortunate time, client
may run into a 'ECONNRESET' error.

By marking a request whether it reused socket or not, we can do
automatic error retry base on it.

Sets a single header value for headers object. If this header already exists in
the to-be-sent headers, its value will be replaced. Use an array of strings
here to send multiple headers with the same name. Non-string values will be
stored without modification. Therefore, request.getHeader() may return
non-string values. However, the non-string values will be converted to strings
for network transmission.

or

When the value is a string an exception will be thrown if it contains
characters outside the latin1 encoding.

If you need to pass UTF-8 characters in the value please encode the value
using the RFC 8187 standard.

Once a socket is assigned to this request and is connected
socket.setNoDelay() will be called.

Once a socket is assigned to this request and is connected
socket.setKeepAlive() will be called.

Consistently set socket timeout only when the socket connects.

Added in: v0.5.9

Once a socket is assigned to this request and is connected
socket.setTimeout() will be called.

Reference to the underlying socket. Usually users will not want to access
this property. In particular, the socket will not emit 'readable' events
because of how the protocol parser attaches to the socket.

This property is guaranteed to be an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specified a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

See writable.uncork().

Is true after request.end() has been called. This property
does not indicate whether the data has been flushed, for this use
request.writableFinished instead.

Is true if all data has been flushed to the underlying system, immediately
before the 'finish' event is emitted.

The chunk parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

Added in: v0.1.29

Sends a chunk of the body. This method can be called multiple times. If no
Content-Length is set, data will automatically be encoded in HTTP Chunked
transfer encoding, so that server knows when the data ends. The
Transfer-Encoding: chunked header is added. Calling request.end()
is necessary to finish sending the request.

The encoding argument is optional and only applies when chunk is a string.
Defaults to 'utf8'.

The callback argument is optional and will be called when this chunk of data
is flushed, but only if the chunk is non-empty.

Returns true if the entire data was flushed successfully to the kernel
buffer. Returns false if all or part of the data was queued in user memory.
'drain' will be emitted when the buffer is free again.

When write function is called with empty string or buffer, it does
nothing and waits for more input.

Emitted each time a request with an HTTP Expect: 100-continue is received.
If this event is not listened for, the server will automatically respond
with a 100 Continue as appropriate.

Handling this event involves calling response.writeContinue() if the
client should continue to send the request body, or generating an appropriate
HTTP response (e.g. 400 Bad Request) if the client should not continue to send
the request body.

When this event is emitted and handled, the 'request' event will
not be emitted.

Emitted each time a request with an HTTP Expect header is received, where the
value is not 100-continue. If this event is not listened for, the server will
automatically respond with a 417 Expectation Failed as appropriate.

When this event is emitted and handled, the 'request' event will
not be emitted.

The default behavior will return a 431 Request Header Fields Too Large if a HPE_HEADER_OVERFLOW error occurs.

The rawPacket is the current buffer that just parsed. Adding this buffer to the error object of 'clientError' event is to make it possible that developers can log the broken packet.

The default action of calling .destroy() on the socket will no longer take place if there are listeners attached for 'clientError'.

Added in: v0.1.94

If a client connection emits an 'error' event, it will be forwarded here.
Listener of this event is responsible for closing/destroying the underlying
socket. For example, one may wish to more gracefully close the socket with a
custom HTTP response instead of abruptly severing the connection. The socket
must be closed or destroyed before the listener ends.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

Default behavior is to try close the socket with a HTTP '400 Bad Request',
or a HTTP '431 Request Header Fields Too Large' in the case of a
HPE_HEADER_OVERFLOW error. If the socket is not writable or headers
of the current attached http.ServerResponse has been sent, it is
immediately destroyed.

socket is the net.Socket object that the error originated from.

When the 'clientError' event occurs, there is no request or response
object, so any HTTP response sent, including response headers and payload,
must be written directly to the socket object. Care must be taken to
ensure the response is a properly formatted HTTP response message.

err is an instance of Error with two extra columns:

In some cases, the client has already received the response and/or the socket
has already been destroyed, like in case of ECONNRESET errors. Before
trying to send data to the socket, it is better to check that it is still
writable.

Emitted when the server closes.

Emitted each time a client requests an HTTP CONNECT method. If this event is
not listened for, then clients requesting a CONNECT method will have their
connections closed.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

After this event is emitted, the request's socket will not have a 'data'
event listener, meaning it will need to be bound in order to handle data
sent to the server on that socket.

This event is emitted when a new TCP stream is established. socket is
typically an object of type net.Socket. Usually users will not want to
access this event. In particular, the socket will not emit 'readable' events
because of how the protocol parser attaches to the socket. The socket can
also be accessed at request.socket.

This event can also be explicitly emitted by users to inject connections
into the HTTP server. In that case, any Duplex stream can be passed.

If socket.setTimeout() is called here, the timeout will be replaced with
server.keepAliveTimeout when the socket has served a request (if
server.keepAliveTimeout is non-zero).

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

When the number of requests on a socket reaches the threshold of
server.maxRequestsPerSocket, the server will drop new requests
and emit 'dropRequest' event instead, then send 503 to client.

Emitted each time there is a request. There may be multiple requests
per connection (in the case of HTTP Keep-Alive connections).

Whether this event is fired can now be controlled by the shouldUpgradeCallback and sockets will be destroyed if upgraded while no event handler is listening.

Not listening to this event no longer causes the socket to be destroyed if a client sends an Upgrade header.

Added in: v0.1.94

Emitted each time a client's HTTP upgrade request is accepted. By default
all HTTP upgrade requests are ignored (i.e. only regular 'request' events
are emitted, sticking with the normal HTTP request/response flow) unless you
listen to this event, in which case they are all accepted (i.e. the 'upgrade'
event is emitted instead, and future communication must handled directly
through the raw socket). You can control this more precisely by using the
server shouldUpgradeCallback option.

Listening to this event is optional and clients cannot insist on a protocol
change.

After this event is emitted, the request's socket will not have a 'data'
event listener, meaning it will need to be bound in order to handle data
sent to the server on that socket.

If an upgrade is accepted by shouldUpgradeCallback but no event handler
is registered then the socket is destroyed, resulting in an immediate
connection closure for the client.

This event is guaranteed to be passed an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specifies a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

The method closes idle connections before returning.

Added in: v0.1.90

Stops the server from accepting new connections and closes all connections
connected to this server which are not sending a request or waiting for
a response.
See net.Server.close().

Closes all established HTTP(S) connections connected to this server, including
active connections connected to this server which are sending a request or
waiting for a response. This does not destroy sockets upgraded to a different
protocol, such as WebSocket or HTTP/2.

This is a forceful way of closing all connections and should be used with
caution. Whenever using this in conjunction with server.close, calling this
after server.close is recommended as to avoid race conditions where new
connections are created between a call to this and a call to server.close.

Closes all connections connected to this server which are not sending a request
or waiting for a response.

Starting with Node.js 19.0.0, there's no need for calling this method in
conjunction with server.close to reap keep-alive connections. Using it
won't cause any harm though, and it can be useful to ensure backwards
compatibility for libraries and applications that need to support versions
older than 19.0.0. Whenever using this in conjunction with server.close,
calling this after server.close is recommended as to avoid race
conditions where new connections are created between a call to this and a
call to server.close.

The default is now set to the minimum between 60000 (60 seconds) or requestTimeout.

Added in: v11.3.0, v10.14.0

Limit the amount of time the parser will wait to receive the complete HTTP
headers.

If the timeout expires, the server responds with status 408 without
forwarding the request to the request listener and then closes the connection.

It must be set to a non-zero value (e.g. 120 seconds) to protect against
potential Denial-of-Service attacks in case the server is deployed without a
reverse proxy in front.

Starts the HTTP server listening for connections.
This method is identical to server.listen() from net.Server.

Limits maximum incoming headers count. If set to 0, no limit will be applied.

The default request timeout changed from no timeout to 300s (5 minutes).

Added in: v14.11.0

Sets the timeout value in milliseconds for receiving the entire request from
the client.

If the timeout expires, the server responds with status 408 without
forwarding the request to the request listener and then closes the connection.

It must be set to a non-zero value (e.g. 120 seconds) to protect against
potential Denial-of-Service attacks in case the server is deployed without a
reverse proxy in front.

The default timeout changed from 120s to 0 (no timeout).

Added in: v0.9.12

Sets the timeout value for sockets, and emits a 'timeout' event on
the Server object, passing the socket as an argument, if a timeout
occurs.

If there is a 'timeout' event listener on the Server object, then it
will be called with the timed-out socket as an argument.

By default, the Server does not timeout sockets. However, if a callback
is assigned to the Server's 'timeout' event, timeouts must be handled
explicitly.

The maximum number of requests socket can handle
before closing keep alive connection.

A value of 0 will disable the limit.

When the limit is reached it will set the Connection header value to close,
but will not actually close the connection, subsequent requests sent
after the limit is reached will get 503 Service Unavailable as a response.

The default timeout changed from 120s to 0 (no timeout).

Added in: v0.9.12

The number of milliseconds of inactivity before a socket is presumed
to have timed out.

A value of 0 will disable the timeout behavior on incoming connections.

The socket timeout logic is set up on connection, so changing this
value only affects new connections to the server, not any existing connections.

The number of milliseconds of inactivity a server needs to wait for additional
incoming data, after it has finished writing the last response, before a socket
will be destroyed.

This timeout value is combined with the
server.keepAliveTimeoutBuffer option to determine the actual socket
timeout, calculated as:
socketTimeout = keepAliveTimeout + keepAliveTimeoutBuffer
If the server receives new data before the keep-alive timeout has fired, it
will reset the regular inactivity timeout, i.e., server.timeout.

A value of 0 will disable the keep-alive timeout behavior on incoming
connections.
A value of 0 makes the HTTP server behave similarly to Node.js versions prior
to 8.0.0, which did not have a keep-alive timeout.

The socket timeout logic is set up on connection, so changing this value only
affects new connections to the server, not any existing connections.

An additional buffer time added to the
server.keepAliveTimeout to extend the internal socket timeout.

This buffer helps reduce connection reset (ECONNRESET) errors by increasing
the socket timeout slightly beyond the advertised keep-alive timeout.

This option applies only to new incoming connections.

No longer experimental.

Added in: v20.4.0

Calls server.close() and returns a promise that fulfills when the
server has closed.

This object is created internally by an HTTP server, not by the user. It is
passed as the second parameter to the 'request' event.

Indicates that the response is completed, or its underlying connection was
terminated prematurely (before the response completion).

Emitted when the response has been sent. More specifically, this event is
emitted when the last segment of the response headers and body have been
handed off to the operating system for transmission over the network. It
does not imply that the client has received anything yet.

This method adds HTTP trailing headers (a header but at the end of the
message) to the response.

Trailers will only be emitted if chunked encoding is used for the
response; if it is not (e.g. if the request was HTTP/1.0), they will
be silently discarded.

HTTP requires the Trailer header to be sent in order to
emit trailers, with a list of the header fields in its value. E.g.,

Attempting to set a header field name or value that contains invalid characters
will result in a TypeError being thrown.

See response.socket.

See writable.cork().

The data parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

This method now returns a reference to ServerResponse.

Added in: v0.1.90

This method signals to the server that all of the response headers and body
have been sent; that server should consider this message complete.
The method, response.end(), MUST be called on each response.

If data is specified, it is similar in effect to calling
response.write(data, encoding) followed by response.end(callback).

If callback is specified, it will be called when the response stream
is finished.

The response.finished property will be true if response.end()
has been called.

Flushes the response headers. See also: request.flushHeaders().

Reads out a header that's already been queued but not sent to the client.
The name is case-insensitive. The type of the return value depends
on the arguments provided to response.setHeader().

Returns an array containing the unique names of the current outgoing headers.
All header names are lowercase.

Returns a shallow copy of the current outgoing headers. Since a shallow copy
is used, array values may be mutated without additional calls to various
header-related http module methods. The keys of the returned object are the
header names and the values are the respective header values. All header names
are lowercase.

The object returned by the response.getHeaders() method does not
prototypically inherit from the JavaScript Object. This means that typical
Object methods such as obj.toString(), obj.hasOwnProperty(), and others
are not defined and will not work.

Returns true if the header identified by name is currently set in the
outgoing headers. The header name matching is case-insensitive.

Boolean (read-only). True if headers were sent, false otherwise.

Removes a header that's queued for implicit sending.

A reference to the original HTTP request object.

When true, the Date header will be automatically generated and sent in
the response if it is not already present in the headers. Defaults to true.

This should only be disabled for testing; HTTP requires the Date header
in responses.

Returns the response object.

Sets a single header value for implicit headers. If this header already exists
in the to-be-sent headers, its value will be replaced. Use an array of strings
here to send multiple headers with the same name. Non-string values will be
stored without modification. Therefore, response.getHeader() may return
non-string values. However, the non-string values will be converted to strings
for network transmission. The same response object is returned to the caller,
to enable call chaining.

or

Attempting to set a header field name or value that contains invalid characters
will result in a TypeError being thrown.

When headers have been set with response.setHeader(), they will be merged
with any headers passed to response.writeHead(), with the headers passed
to response.writeHead() given precedence.

If response.writeHead() method is called and this method has not been
called, it will directly write the supplied header values onto the network
channel without caching internally, and the response.getHeader() on the
header will not yield the expected result. If progressive population of headers
is desired with potential future retrieval and modification, use
response.setHeader() instead of response.writeHead().

Sets the Socket's timeout value to msecs. If a callback is
provided, then it is added as a listener on the 'timeout' event on
the response object.

If no 'timeout' listener is added to the request, the response, or
the server, then sockets are destroyed when they time out. If a handler is
assigned to the request, the response, or the server's 'timeout' events,
timed out sockets must be handled explicitly.

Reference to the underlying socket. Usually users will not want to access
this property. In particular, the socket will not emit 'readable' events
because of how the protocol parser attaches to the socket. After
response.end(), the property is nulled.

This property is guaranteed to be an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specified a socket
type other than <net.Socket>.

When using implicit headers (not calling response.writeHead() explicitly),
this property controls the status code that will be sent to the client when
the headers get flushed.

After response header was sent to the client, this property indicates the
status code which was sent out.

When using implicit headers (not calling response.writeHead() explicitly),
this property controls the status message that will be sent to the client when
the headers get flushed. If this is left as undefined then the standard
message for the status code will be used.

After response header was sent to the client, this property indicates the
status message which was sent out.

If set to true, Node.js will check whether the Content-Length
header value and the size of the body, in bytes, are equal.
Mismatching the Content-Length header value will result
in an Error being thrown, identified by code: 'ERR_HTTP_CONTENT_LENGTH_MISMATCH'.

See writable.uncork().

Is true after response.end() has been called. This property
does not indicate whether the data has been flushed, for this use
response.writableFinished instead.

Is true if all data has been flushed to the underlying system, immediately
before the 'finish' event is emitted.

The chunk parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

Added in: v0.1.29

If this method is called and response.writeHead() has not been called,
it will switch to implicit header mode and flush the implicit headers.

This sends a chunk of the response body. This method may
be called multiple times to provide successive parts of the body.

If rejectNonStandardBodyWrites is set to true in createServer
then writing to the body is not allowed when the request method or response
status do not support content. If an attempt is made to write to the body for a
HEAD request or as part of a 204 or 304response, a synchronous Error
with the code ERR_HTTP_BODY_NOT_ALLOWED is thrown.

chunk can be a string or a buffer. If chunk is a string,
the second parameter specifies how to encode it into a byte stream.
callback will be called when this chunk of data is flushed.

This is the raw HTTP body and has nothing to do with higher-level multi-part
body encodings that may be used.

The first time response.write() is called, it will send the buffered
header information and the first chunk of the body to the client. The second
time response.write() is called, Node.js assumes data will be streamed,
and sends the new data separately. That is, the response is buffered up to the
first chunk of the body.

Returns true if the entire data was flushed successfully to the kernel
buffer. Returns false if all or part of the data was queued in user memory.
'drain' will be emitted when the buffer is free again.

Sends an HTTP/1.1 100 Continue message to the client, indicating that
the request body should be sent. See the 'checkContinue' event on
Server.

Allow passing hints as an object.

Added in: v18.11.0

Sends an HTTP/1.1 103 Early Hints message to the client with a Link header,
indicating that the user agent can preload/preconnect the linked resources.
The hints is an object containing the values of headers to be sent with
early hints message. The optional callback argument will be called when
the response message has been written.

Example

Allow passing headers as an array.

Return this from writeHead() to allow chaining with end().

A RangeError is thrown if statusCode is not a number in the range [100, 999].

Added in: v0.1.30

Sends a response header to the request. The status code is a 3-digit HTTP
status code, like 404. The last argument, headers, are the response headers.
Optionally one can give a human-readable statusMessage as the second
argument.

headers may be an Array where the keys and values are in the same list.
It is not a list of tuples. So, the even-numbered offsets are key values,
and the odd-numbered offsets are the associated values. The array is in the same
format as request.rawHeaders.

Returns a reference to the ServerResponse, so that calls can be chained.

This method must only be called once on a message and it must
be called before response.end() is called.

If response.write() or response.end() are called before calling
this, the implicit/mutable headers will be calculated and call this function.

When headers have been set with response.setHeader(), they will be merged
with any headers passed to response.writeHead(), with the headers passed
to response.writeHead() given precedence.

If this method is called and response.setHeader() has not been called,
it will directly write the supplied header values onto the network channel
without caching internally, and the response.getHeader() on the header
will not yield the expected result. If progressive population of headers is
desired with potential future retrieval and modification, use
response.setHeader() instead.

Content-Length is read in bytes, not characters. Use
Buffer.byteLength() to determine the length of the body in bytes. Node.js
will check whether Content-Length and the length of the body which has
been transmitted are equal or not.

Attempting to set a header field name or value that contains invalid characters
will result in a TypeError being thrown.

Sends a HTTP/1.1 102 Processing message to the client, indicating that
the request body should be sent.

The destroyed value returns true after the incoming data is consumed.

The readableHighWaterMark value mirrors that of the socket.

Added in: v0.1.17

An IncomingMessage object is created by http.Server or
http.ClientRequest and passed as the first argument to the 'request'
and 'response' event respectively. It may be used to access response
status, headers, and data.

Different from its socket value which is a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, the
IncomingMessage itself extends <stream.Readable> and is created separately to
parse and emit the incoming HTTP headers and payload, as the underlying socket
may be reused multiple times in case of keep-alive.

Emitted when the request has been aborted.

The close event is now emitted when the request has been completed and not when the underlying socket is closed.

Added in: v0.4.2

Emitted when the request has been completed.

The message.aborted property will be true if the request has
been aborted.

The message.complete property will be true if a complete HTTP message has
been received and successfully parsed.

This property is particularly useful as a means of determining if a client or
server fully transmitted a message before a connection was terminated:

Alias for message.socket.

The function returns this for consistency with other Readable streams.

Added in: v0.3.0

Calls destroy() on the socket that received the IncomingMessage. If error
is provided, an 'error' event is emitted on the socket and error is passed
as an argument to any listeners on the event.

The joinDuplicateHeaders option in the http.request() and http.createServer() functions ensures that duplicate headers are not discarded, but rather combined using a comma separator, in accordance with RFC 9110 Section 5.3.

message.headers is now lazily computed using an accessor property on the prototype and is no longer enumerable.

Added in: v0.1.5

The request/response headers object.

Key-value pairs of header names and values. Header names are lower-cased.

Duplicates in raw headers are handled in the following ways, depending on the
header name:

Similar to message.headers, but there is no join logic and the values are
always arrays of strings, even for headers received just once.

In case of server request, the HTTP version sent by the client. In the case of
client response, the HTTP version of the connected-to server.
Probably either '1.1' or '1.0'.

Also message.httpVersionMajor is the first integer and
message.httpVersionMinor is the second.

Only valid for request obtained from http.Server.

The request method as a string. Read only. Examples: 'GET', 'DELETE'.

The raw request/response headers list exactly as they were received.

The keys and values are in the same list. It is not a
list of tuples. So, the even-numbered offsets are key values, and the
odd-numbered offsets are the associated values.

Header names are not lowercased, and duplicates are not merged.

The raw request/response trailer keys and values exactly as they were
received. Only populated at the 'end' event.

Calls message.socket.setTimeout(msecs, callback).

The net.Socket object associated with the connection.

With HTTPS support, use request.socket.getPeerCertificate() to obtain the
client's authentication details.

This property is guaranteed to be an instance of the <net.Socket> class,
a subclass of <stream.Duplex>, unless the user specified a socket
type other than <net.Socket> or internally nulled.

Only valid for response obtained from http.ClientRequest.

The 3-digit HTTP response status code. E.G. 404.

Only valid for response obtained from http.ClientRequest.

The HTTP response status message (reason phrase). E.G. OK or Internal Server Error.

The request/response trailers object. Only populated at the 'end' event.

Similar to message.trailers, but there is no join logic and the values are
always arrays of strings, even for headers received just once.
Only populated at the 'end' event.

Only valid for request obtained from http.Server.

Request URL string. This contains only the URL that is present in the actual
HTTP request. Take the following request:

To parse the URL into its parts:

When request.url is '/status?name=ryan' and process.env.HOST is undefined:

Ensure that you set process.env.HOST to the server's host name, or consider
replacing this part entirely. If using req.headers.host, ensure proper
validation is used, as clients may specify a custom Host header.

This class serves as the parent class of http.ClientRequest
and http.ServerResponse. It is an abstract outgoing message from
the perspective of the participants of an HTTP transaction.

Emitted when the buffer of the message is free again.

Emitted when the transmission is finished successfully.

Emitted after outgoingMessage.end() is called.
When the event is emitted, all data has been processed but not necessarily
completely flushed.

Adds HTTP trailers (headers but at the end of the message) to the message.

Trailers will only be emitted if the message is chunked encoded. If not,
the trailers will be silently discarded.

HTTP requires the Trailer header to be sent to emit trailers,
with a list of header field names in its value, e.g.

Attempting to set a header field name or value that contains invalid characters
will result in a TypeError being thrown.

Append a single header value to the header object.

If the value is an array, this is equivalent to calling this method multiple
times.

If there were no previous values for the header, this is equivalent to calling
outgoingMessage.setHeader(name, value).

Depending of the value of options.uniqueHeaders when the client request or the
server were created, this will end up in the header being sent multiple times or
a single time with values joined using ; .

Alias of outgoingMessage.socket.

See writable.cork().

Destroys the message. Once a socket is associated with the message
and is connected, that socket will be destroyed as well.

The chunk parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

add callback argument.

Added in: v0.1.90

Finishes the outgoing message. If any parts of the body are unsent, it will
flush them to the underlying system. If the message is chunked, it will
send the terminating chunk 0\r\n\r\n, and send the trailers (if any).

If chunk is specified, it is equivalent to calling
outgoingMessage.write(chunk, encoding), followed by
outgoingMessage.end(callback).

If callback is provided, it will be called when the message is finished
(equivalent to a listener of the 'finish' event).

Flushes the message headers.

For efficiency reason, Node.js normally buffers the message headers
until outgoingMessage.end() is called or the first chunk of message data
is written. It then tries to pack the headers and data into a single TCP
packet.

It is usually desired (it saves a TCP round-trip), but not when the first
data is not sent until possibly much later. outgoingMessage.flushHeaders()
bypasses the optimization and kickstarts the message.

Gets the value of the HTTP header with the given name. If that header is not
set, the returned value will be undefined.

Returns an array containing the unique names of the current outgoing headers.
All names are lowercase.

Returns a shallow copy of the current outgoing headers. Since a shallow
copy is used, array values may be mutated without additional calls to
various header-related HTTP module methods. The keys of the returned
object are the header names and the values are the respective header
values. All header names are lowercase.

The object returned by the outgoingMessage.getHeaders() method does
not prototypically inherit from the JavaScript Object. This means that
typical Object methods such as obj.toString(), obj.hasOwnProperty(),
and others are not defined and will not work.

Returns true if the header identified by name is currently set in the
outgoing headers. The header name is case-insensitive.

Read-only. true if the headers were sent, otherwise false.

Overrides the stream.pipe() method inherited from the legacy Stream class
which is the parent class of http.OutgoingMessage.

Calling this method will throw an Error because outgoingMessage is a
write-only stream.

Removes a header that is queued for implicit sending.

Sets a single header value. If the header already exists in the to-be-sent
headers, its value will be replaced. Use an array of strings to send multiple
headers with the same name.

Sets multiple header values for implicit headers.
headers must be an instance of Headers or Map,
if a header already exists in the to-be-sent headers,
its value will be replaced.

or

When headers have been set with outgoingMessage.setHeaders(),
they will be merged with any headers passed to response.writeHead(),
with the headers passed to response.writeHead() given precedence.

Once a socket is associated with the message and is connected,
socket.setTimeout() will be called with msecs as the first parameter.

Reference to the underlying socket. Usually, users will not want to access
this property.

After calling outgoingMessage.end(), this property will be nulled.

See writable.uncork()

The number of times outgoingMessage.cork() has been called.

Is true if outgoingMessage.end() has been called. This property does
not indicate whether the data has been flushed. For that purpose, use
message.writableFinished instead.

Is true if all data has been flushed to the underlying system.

The highWaterMark of the underlying socket if assigned. Otherwise, the default
buffer level when writable.write() starts returning false (16384).

The number of buffered bytes.

Always false.

The chunk parameter can now be a Uint8Array.

The callback argument was added.

Added in: v0.1.29

Sends a chunk of the body. This method can be called multiple times.

The encoding argument is only relevant when chunk is a string. Defaults to
'utf8'.

The callback argument is optional and will be called when this chunk of data
is flushed.

Returns true if the entire data was flushed successfully to the kernel
buffer. Returns false if all or part of the data was queued in the user
memory. The 'drain' event will be emitted when the buffer is free again.

A list of the HTTP methods that are supported by the parser.

A collection of all the standard HTTP response status codes, and the
short description of each. For example, http.STATUS_CODES[404] === 'Not Found'.

Add optimizeEmptyRequests option.

The shouldUpgradeCallback option is now supported.

The highWaterMark option is supported now.

The requestTimeout, headersTimeout, keepAliveTimeout, and connectionsCheckingInterval options are supported now.

The noDelay option now defaults to true.

The noDelay, keepAlive and keepAliveInitialDelay options are supported now.

The maxHeaderSize option is supported now.

The insecureHTTPParser option is supported now.

The options argument is supported now.

Added in: v0.1.13

options <Object>

requestListener <Function>

Returns: <http.Server>

Returns a new instance of http.Server.

The requestListener is a function which is automatically
added to the 'request' event.

The url parameter can now be passed along with a separate options object.

The options parameter can be a WHATWG URL object.

Added in: v0.3.6

Since most requests are GET requests without bodies, Node.js provides this
convenience method. The only difference between this method and
http.request() is that it sets the method to GET by default and calls req.end()
automatically. The callback must take care to consume the response
data for reasons stated in http.ClientRequest section.

The callback is invoked with a single argument that is an instance of
http.IncomingMessage.

JSON fetching example:

The agent now uses HTTP Keep-Alive and a 5 second timeout by default.

Added in: v0.5.9

Global instance of Agent which is used as the default for all HTTP client
requests. Diverges from a default Agent configuration by having keepAlive
enabled and a timeout of 5 seconds.

Read-only property specifying the maximum allowed size of HTTP headers in bytes.
Defaults to 16 KiB. Configurable using the --max-http-header-size CLI
option.

This can be overridden for servers and client requests by passing the
maxHeaderSize option.

When using a URL object parsed username and password will now be properly URI decoded.

It is possible to abort a request with an AbortSignal.

The maxHeaderSize option is supported now.

The insecureHTTPParser option is supported now.

The url parameter can now be passed along with a separate options object.

The options parameter can be a WHATWG URL object.

Added in: v0.3.6

options in socket.connect() are also supported.

Node.js maintains several connections per server to make HTTP requests.
This function allows one to transparently issue requests.

url can be a string or a URL object. If url is a
string, it is automatically parsed with new URL(). If it is a URL
object, it will be automatically converted to an ordinary options object.

If both url and options are specified, the objects are merged, with the
options properties taking precedence.

The optional callback parameter will be added as a one-time listener for
the 'response' event.

http.request() returns an instance of the http.ClientRequest
class. The ClientRequest instance is a writable stream. If one needs to
upload a file with a POST request, then write to the ClientRequest object.

In the example req.end() was called. With http.request() one
must always call req.end() to signify the end of the request -
even if there is no data being written to the request body.

If any error is encountered during the request (be that with DNS resolution,
TCP level errors, or actual HTTP parse errors) an 'error' event is emitted
on the returned request object. As with all 'error' events, if no listeners
are registered the error will be thrown.

There are a few special headers that should be noted.

Sending a 'Connection: keep-alive' will notify Node.js that the connection to
the server should be persisted until the next request.

Sending a 'Content-Length' header will disable the default chunked encoding.

Sending an 'Expect' header will immediately send the request headers.
Usually, when sending 'Expect: 100-continue', both a timeout and a listener
for the 'continue' event should be set. See RFC 2616 Section 8.2.3 for more
information.

Sending an Authorization header will override using the auth option
to compute basic authentication.

Example using a URL as options:

In a successful request, the following events will be emitted in the following
order:

In the case of a connection error, the following events will be emitted:

In the case of a premature connection close before the response is received,
the following events will be emitted in the following order:

In the case of a premature connection close after the response is received,
the following events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.destroy() is called before a socket is assigned, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.destroy() is called before the connection succeeds, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.destroy() is called after the response is received, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.abort() is called before a socket is assigned, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.abort() is called before the connection succeeds, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

If req.abort() is called after the response is received, the following
events will be emitted in the following order:

Setting the timeout option or using the setTimeout() function will
not abort the request or do anything besides add a 'timeout' event.

Passing an AbortSignal and then calling abort() on the corresponding
AbortController will behave the same way as calling .destroy() on the
request. Specifically, the 'error' event will be emitted with an error with
the message 'AbortError: The operation was aborted', the code 'ABORT_ERR'
and the cause, if one was provided.

The label parameter is added.

Added in: v14.3.0

Performs the low-level validations on the provided name that are done when
res.setHeader(name, value) is called.

Passing illegal value as name will result in a TypeError being thrown,
identified by code: 'ERR_INVALID_HTTP_TOKEN'.

It is not necessary to use this method before passing headers to an HTTP request
or response. The HTTP module will automatically validate such headers.

Example:

Performs the low-level validations on the provided value that are done when
res.setHeader(name, value) is called.

Passing illegal value as value will result in a TypeError being thrown.

It is not necessary to use this method before passing headers to an HTTP request
or response. The HTTP module will automatically validate such headers.

Examples:

Set the maximum number of idle HTTP parsers.

Dynamically resets the global configurations to enable built-in proxy support for
fetch() and http.request()/https.request() at runtime, as an alternative
to using the --use-env-proxy flag or NODE_USE_ENV_PROXY environment variable.
It can also be used to override settings configured from the environment variables.

As this function resets the global configurations, any previously configured
http.globalAgent, https.globalAgent or undici global dispatcher would be
overridden after this function is invoked. It's recommended to invoke it before any
requests are made and avoid invoking it in the middle of any requests.

See Built-in Proxy Support for details on proxy URL formats and NO_PROXY
syntax.

A browser-compatible implementation of <WebSocket>.

When Node.js creates the global agent, if the NODE_USE_ENV_PROXY environment variable is
set to 1 or --use-env-proxy is enabled, the global agent will be constructed
with proxyEnv: process.env, enabling proxy support based on the environment variables.

To enable proxy support dynamically and globally, use http.setGlobalProxyFromEnv().

Custom agents can also be created with proxy support by passing a
proxyEnv option when constructing the agent. The value can be process.env
if they just want to inherit the configuration from the environment variables,
or an object with specific setting overriding the environment.

The following properties of the proxyEnv are checked to configure proxy
support.

If the request is made to a Unix domain socket, the proxy settings will be ignored.

Proxy URLs can use either HTTP or HTTPS protocols:

The NO_PROXY environment variable supports several formats:

Multiple entries should be separated by commas.

To start a Node.js process with proxy support enabled for all requests sent
through the default global agent, either use the NODE_USE_ENV_PROXY environment
variable:

Or the --use-env-proxy flag.

To enable proxy support dynamically and globally with process.env (the default option of http.setGlobalProxyFromEnv()):

To enable proxy support dynamically and globally with custom settings:

To create a custom agent with built-in proxy support:

Alternatively, the following also works: