Title: useReducer – React
Source: https://react.dev/reference/react/useReducer

useReducer is a React Hook that lets you add a reducer to your component.

Call useReducer at the top level of your component to manage its state with a reducer.

See more examples below.

useReducer returns an array with exactly two values:

The dispatch function returned by useReducer lets you update the state to a different value and trigger a re-render. You need to pass the action as the only argument to the dispatch function:

React will set the next state to the result of calling the reducer function you’ve provided with the current state and the action you’ve passed to dispatch.

dispatch functions do not have a return value.

The dispatch function only updates the state variable for the next render. If you read the state variable after calling the dispatch function, you will still get the old value that was on the screen before your call.

If the new value you provide is identical to the current state, as determined by an Object.is comparison, React will skip re-rendering the component and its children. This is an optimization. React may still need to call your component before ignoring the result, but it shouldn’t affect your code.

React batches state updates. It updates the screen after all the event handlers have run and have called their set functions. This prevents multiple re-renders during a single event. In the rare case that you need to force React to update the screen earlier, for example to access the DOM, you can use flushSync.

Call useReducer at the top level of your component to manage state with a reducer.

useReducer returns an array with exactly two items:

To update what’s on the screen, call dispatch with an object representing what the user did, called an action:

React will pass the current state and the action to your reducer function. Your reducer will calculate and return the next state. React will store that next state, render your component with it, and update the UI.

useReducer is very similar to useState, but it lets you move the state update logic from event handlers into a single function outside of your component. Read more about choosing between useState and useReducer.

A reducer function is declared like this:

Then you need to fill in the code that will calculate and return the next state. By convention, it is common to write it as a switch statement. For each case in the switch, calculate and return some next state.

Actions can have any shape. By convention, it’s common to pass objects with a type property identifying the action. It should include the minimal necessary information that the reducer needs to compute the next state.

The action type names are local to your component. Each action describes a single interaction, even if that leads to multiple changes in data. The shape of the state is arbitrary, but usually it’ll be an object or an array.

Read extracting state logic into a reducer to learn more.

State is read-only. Don’t modify any objects or arrays in state:

Instead, always return new objects from your reducer:

Read updating objects in state and updating arrays in state to learn more.

In this example, the reducer manages a state object with two fields: name and age.

React saves the initial state once and ignores it on the next renders.

Although the result of createInitialState(username) is only used for the initial render, you’re still calling this function on every render. This can be wasteful if it’s creating large arrays or performing expensive calculations.

To solve this, you may pass it as an initializer function to useReducer as the third argument instead:

Notice that you’re passing createInitialState, which is the function itself, and not createInitialState(), which is the result of calling it. This way, the initial state does not get re-created after initialization.

In the above example, createInitialState takes a username argument. If your initializer doesn’t need any information to compute the initial state, you may pass null as the second argument to useReducer.

This example passes the initializer function, so the createInitialState function only runs during initialization. It does not run when component re-renders, such as when you type into the input.

Calling the dispatch function does not change state in the running code:

This is because states behaves like a snapshot. Updating state requests another render with the new state value, but does not affect the state JavaScript variable in your already-running event handler.

If you need to guess the next state value, you can calculate it manually by calling the reducer yourself:

React will ignore your update if the next state is equal to the previous state, as determined by an Object.is comparison. This usually happens when you change an object or an array in state directly:

You mutated an existing state object and returned it, so React ignored the update. To fix this, you need to ensure that you’re always updating objects in state and updating arrays in state instead of mutating them:

Make sure that every case branch copies all of the existing fields when returning the new state:

Without ...state above, the returned next state would only contain the age field and nothing else.

If your state unexpectedly becomes undefined, you’re likely forgetting to return state in one of the cases, or your action type doesn’t match any of the case statements. To find why, throw an error outside the switch:

You can also use a static type checker like TypeScript to catch such mistakes.

You might get an error that says: Too many re-renders. React limits the number of renders to prevent an infinite loop. Typically, this means that you’re unconditionally dispatching an action during render, so your component enters a loop: render, dispatch (which causes a render), render, dispatch (which causes a render), and so on. Very often, this is caused by a mistake in specifying an event handler:

If you can’t find the cause of this error, click on the arrow next to the error in the console and look through the JavaScript stack to find the specific dispatch function call responsible for the error.

In Strict Mode, React will call your reducer and initializer functions twice. This shouldn’t break your code.

This development-only behavior helps you keep components pure. React uses the result of one of the calls, and ignores the result of the other call. As long as your component, initializer, and reducer functions are pure, this shouldn’t affect your logic. However, if they are accidentally impure, this helps you notice the mistakes.

For example, this impure reducer function mutates an array in state:

Because React calls your reducer function twice, you’ll see the todo was added twice, so you’ll know that there is a mistake. In this example, you can fix the mistake by replacing the array instead of mutating it:

Now that this reducer function is pure, calling it an extra time doesn’t make a difference in behavior. This is why React calling it twice helps you find mistakes. Only component, initializer, and reducer functions need to be pure. Event handlers don’t need to be pure, so React will never call your event handlers twice.

Read keeping components pure to learn more.